British expats could forfeit their rights to live in Spain if they vote to leave the EU, the Spanish prime minister has warned, saying forgoing free movement rights would be “negative for everyone”.
“Leaving the European Union would mean that British citizens would lose their right to move freely, work and do business within the largest economic area, the largest market in the world,” he said.
Leave campaigners have argued that new rights for British citizens to live and work in other EU countries could be negotiated after Brexit.
Free movement and its effects on migration to the UK is one of the key issues for voters, according to new polling conducted by Vote Leave, which found almost half of those surveyed said levels of migration from the other 27 EU countries had been bad for the UK, against 26% who thought it had benefited Britain.Resistance to the military’s coup attempt may have had more to do with Turkey’s past than with the president’s popularity
“The world that remains silent, the United Nations that remains silent – how will you be brought to account for this?” Erdoğan said at a rally for Turkey’s upcoming referendum.
The so-called special relationship with the United States isn’t providing much comfort to the Brexit side these days; President Obama’s recent admonition to vote no in the referendum enraged many people who believe America should stay out of it and let their country think for itself.
“I think it a wonderful thing that a British political leader has shown that Britain will not bow before the putative caliph in Ankara,” he said.
You will be asked one question in the EU referendum: should the United Kingdom remain a member of the European Union or leave the European Union?A fall in the value of the pound would make exports cheaper, but this could be negated by trade barriers
The EU remains the most important market for UK goods, so it is possible that any competitive gains from a cheaper pound would be negated by trade barriers in the event of a vote to leave.
A leave vote would therefore need to be followed by an emergency debate in parliament from Monday 27 June onwards about the UK’s withdrawal options, where the most likely outcome, as you indicate, would be overwhelming support for the UK to remain in EEA, which would of course outrage hard-line Brexiters in the Conservative party.
U.K. officials have said that up to 820,000 jobs could be lost if Britain leaves the EU.
Leaders of the Scottish National Party have said they would seek a new referendum on Scotland's independence if Britain votes to leave the EU.
“Some parts of the British media do quite frequently refer back to the Second World War as the context of the discussion,” Charles Clarke, a former Labour cabinet minister, said at a recent conference, adding that “the virulence” of the way in which some papers seek to set the agenda about Europe has affected the British political debate.
Those on the receiving end of Euroskeptic coverage include President Obama, who, during a recent visit here, supported continued British membership of the bloc and said there would be no quick free trade deal with the United States if Britain quit.
“It’s a legacy thing,” he said.Chancellor delivers stark warning of £15bn tax rises, increase in fuel and alcohol duties and £15bn cuts to health, education and defence if Britain leaves the EU
Vote Leave, the official out campaign, responded to leaks of the plans by accusing the chancellor of breaking seven key Tory pledges on which they were elected last year, and set out a competing vision of a post-Brexit world in which Britain would claw back money from the EU.
Vote Leave said it believes an out vote should be followed by a negotiation strategy for informal talks that will lead to a new UK-EU treaty, immediate legislation in parliament, and a framework for legislation and policy decisions between 2016 and 2020.
Chris Grayling, the leader of the House of Commons, said: “After we vote leave, the public need to see that there is immediate action to take back control from the EU.
If we vote to leave and take control of our money we will have more to spend on the priorities that matter to us like the NHS.”For decades, the hospitality, retail, food and construction industries in particular have taken advantage of the bloc’s rules allowing freedom of movement, meaning Europeans like Mr. Graca can work legally in any of the 28 countries that are members.
Should Britain leave and start requiring European citizens to clear the same visa hurdles as other foreign workers, three-quarters of the 2.2 million people from other E.U. countries currently working in Britain wouldn’t make the cut, according to the Migration Observatory at Oxford University.
“We have absolutely no power to control the numbers who are coming with no job offers and no qualifications from the 28 E.U. countries,” Boris Johnson, the former London mayor, said in a recent speech rallying for a Brexit.
“The fact is we’re doing jobs that most British people don’t want to do,” said Anna Pawelec, the manager of Pillars of Hercules, a 150-year-old pub on Greek Street near Soho that has British owners but is run almost entirely by Poles.
Top officials of the European Central Bank, including Mario Draghi, the president, have said they have contingency plans if voters in Britain choose to leave the bloc.
“The E.C.B. has allowed politicians to sit on their hands with regard to growth-enhancing reforms and necessary fiscal consolidation,” David Folkerts-Landau, the chief economist of Deutsche Bank, said in a note to clients recently.Leaving the EU would hit British living standards, stoke inflation and wipe up to 5.5% off GDP, the International Monetary Fund has warned with less than a week to go until the referendum.
The IMF used its annual report on the British economy to say Brexit would plunge the UK into recession next year and that it could see no economic advantage in leaving the EU.
The resulting uncertainty would hit spending and financial markets, it said, estimating that even under a relatively benign scenario in which the UK negotiated a trade status similar to that between Norway and the EU, output would fall by 1.5% by 2019, compared with where it would be under continued EU membership.
“While recognising that this choice is for UK voters to make and that their decisions will reflect both economic and non-economic factors, directors agreed that the net economic effects of leaving the EU would likely be negative and substantial,” they said in a press release accompanying the report.
As opinion polls on the referendum result fluctuate, I want to offer a clear set of facts, based on my six decades of experience in financial markets, to help voters understand the very real consequences of a vote to leave the EU.
A vote to leave could see the week end with a Black Friday, and serious consequences for ordinary people.According to the British Election Study, the overall vote is pretty evenly split between Brexit and remain, but two thirds of Britain’s minority ethnic voters favour staying in the EU.
Whatever it is, I hope that voters from all backgrounds remember that, although immigration has become the biggest issue regarding our EU membership, history shows us that migrants have always been scapegoats for the failings of our politicians, and the only thing that has changed is the groups who have been labelled as the problem.Results from across the country suggesting the Brexit camp were on the brink of declaring a referendum victory saw sterling down 10% against the dollar
Global markets plunge after UK votes to leave EU – live updates Read more
"But others consider Russia to be a superpower that supports Moldova and other former Soviet republics, and that Europe wants to get revenge on Russia through economic ties with other former Soviet republics, like Belarus, Georgia, and Ukraine."Crimea's vote to join Russia leaves thousands of military personnel stranded in a no-man's-land, forgotten by their government and fearful that they might soon belong to another country, whose own troops urge them to defect
Last Thursday, Crimea's parliament voted to join Russia, and said a referendum would take place on 16 March to "confirm" the decision.
William Hill said one woman in central London placed her first ever bet by putting £100,000 on the UK voting to stay, while another woman, from Kingston, south-west London, gambled for the first time by staking £10,000 on leave.
Maybe unsurprisingly, I tend to think the former, but that doesn’t mean we don’t have to reflect on all of their potential flaws and decide how we best interpret them in the future.”Europe’s far-right parties have rejoiced at the UK’s vote to leave the European Union, hailing it as a victory for their own anti-immigration and anti-EU stances and vowing to push for similar referendums in countries such as France, the Netherlands and Denmark.
Le Pen, who has been calling for a French EU referendum for three years and is expected to comfortably reach the final round of the presidential election in April, had seized on the UK’s EU referendum to bolster her critical stance on the bloc and on Brexit as a new opportunity for the far right to win over new French voters.
The European Union as a political union has failed,” said Storch, who was recently expelled from the Tories’ party group in the European parliament after suggesting German police might be within their rights to shoot refugees trying to cross the border.
“Golden Dawn welcomes the victory of the nationalist and patriotic forces in Great Britain against the European Union, which has been transformed into the doleful instrument of loan sharks,” said the party’s leader Nikolaos Michaloliakos.
“The Leave of the United Kingdom sets forth the failure of political communities facing austerity, and the egotism of the member states, incapable of being a community … We want a Europe which is a ‘community’ and not a union of banks and lobbies,” said the party, writing on the blog of founder Beppe Grillo.
“They will have the chance to reject today’s rule by the global elite and embrace real change that delivers a government of, by and for the people,” Trump said.
Trump said the predictions had been that thousands would turn up – in fact the predictions had been a couple of hundred – but and his staff estimated the turnout at only 43.Vote Leave’s poster boy should have been crowing, so why was his post-referendum press conference so subdued?
“People talk about reluctant remainers, but I think there have been a lot of reluctant Brexiters around, people who voted leave thinking it wouldn’t happen but they’d be able to vent and to tell all their friends at dinner parties they’d done it,” said one Tory minister.
He looked more like a king unable to take more such victories.The British people have voted to leave the European Union after a historic referendum in which they rejected the advice of the main Westminster party leaders and instead took a plunge into the political unknown.
Speaking at a party in Westminster, the Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, declared Friday the UK’s “independence day”, and said the referendum result was a “victory for real people, a victory for ordinary people, a victory for decent people”.
Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, said the British people had made their decision and called for article 50 – the clause that allows the UK to leave the European Union – to be invoked straight away.
Hilary Benn, the shadow foreign secretary, had already said Cameron would have to resign if the UK voted for Brexit.
“If there were to be a vote to leave, then as far as the prime minister is concerned I don’t see how he is going to remain in his job for very long at all,” he said.
Cameron had said he wanted to stay on to trigger article 50 and start negotiations to take the UK out of the EU in the event of a vote to leave but there is likely to be considerable pressure for him to quit given the public’s defiance of his forceful calls for the UK to remain in the EU.
The former Labour leader Ed Miliband said: “It’s a nation divided and the PM will have a big responsibility – particularly if it’s a remain win – to show he understands what people are saying on the leave side of the argument.
“While the focus of the UK’s withdrawal from the European Union is likely to be on the impact on the City and migration, the impact on the sports world could be significant,” said Shapiro.
For voters who feel left behind by globalization and the rapid social changes that have come with it, a vote to leave the European Union can feel like a vote to restore Britain to its former greatness.
Amsterdam, Netherlands (CNN) Moments after the startling results of Britain's vote to leave the European Union emerged, anti-immigrant crusaders in other parts of Europe gave notice they, too, would try to get their countries to leave.
It was a move that backfired spectacularly and led to the dramatic announcement that he'll quit as Britain's prime minister in the aftermath of the Brexit vote -- an era-defining moment that will no doubt lead to him being remembered for generations to come as the man who took the country out of the European Union.
He resignation was perhaps inevitable -- a man who said that leaving the EU would be like "putting a bomb under our economy" was never going to be able to negotiate the country's exit.
"What this country doesn't need right now is more political instability on top of the market turmoil," Foster said.(CNN) Britain's stunning vote to leave the European Union is both historic and world-changing.
Far-right politicians in the Netherlands and France looked at what happened in Britain and said, hey, we want get-out-of-the EU referendums in our countries too.
Addressing "Leave" supporters at a results party in London as UK broadcasters began to call the referendum results in their favor, UK Independence Party (UKIP) leader Nigel Farage said the country was marking its "Independence Day."
Faced with an ever growing list of prominent personalities, captains of industry, world leaders and famous figures backing the "Remain" cause, Conservative MP Michael Gove, seen as the brains behind the "Vote Leave" campaign, told Sky News: " I think people in this country have had enough of experts ."
Scotland voted overwhelmingly in favor of staying in the EU, leading to calls for a second referendum on Scottish independence to allow Scots to "remain" even if the rest of the nation leaves.
"Scotland is voting overwhelming to stay; if Scotland cannot be coerced into leaving the EU against its will, you cannot in all decency deny them a second referendum," Schama said.
Investors are reacting with shock to the announcement that the United Kingdom has voted to leave the European Union, which is a political, economic and free trade union between 28 member nations.
But the gains -- and more -- were wiped out Friday.(CNN) While the British people voted convincingly to leave the European Union, a deeply polarized country has emerged.
He told Irish broadcaster RTE the "Brexit" vote means that "the British government now has no democratic mandate to represent the views of the North in any future negotiations with the European Union and I do believe that there is a democratic imperative for a 'border poll' to be held."
(CNN) Scotland will likely seek independence for a second time this decade after the historic vote for the United Kingdom to leave the European Union, Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said Friday.
Sturgeon's Scottish National Party was elected on a platform that vowed, in part, to revisit the independence issue -- last decided in a failed 2014 referendum -- should the country be "taken out of the EU against our will," Sturgeon said.
Sturgeon said her government would begin preparing legislation for a new referendum that could be held before the UK formally leaves the EU -- two years from when the government formally notifies the bloc of its intent to drop out.
As it became clear that more than half of the nearly 33 million referendum voters had cast their ballots to leave the EU, Farage -- the leader of the UK Independence Party (UKIP) -- declared it a "victory for real people, a victory for ordinary people, a victory for decent people."
France's far-right Front National party was Friday calling for a similar vote, seizing on the UK's decision as an endorsement on its own anti-Europe and anti-immigration policies -- a Frexit to follow the Brexit.
James Thornton, the chief executive of Client Earth, the lawyers who forced the government to improve its air pollution plans, said Brexit “leaves me shocked, disappointed and extremely concerned about the future of environmental protections in the UK.” Craig Bennett, head of Friends of the Earth, said the leave vote was a “red alert” for the environment.
But his departure from a big EU finance job became a foregone conclusion after the vote for Brexit, because many European politicians oppose having a Briton in charge of financial services when the UK is on its way out.
The spokesman said a decision on a future British commissioner would fall to Cameron’s successor: “It will be for the next prime minister to decide, following discussions with European partners, what role the UK plays in the European commission, given we remain a full member of the EU until we have left.”Vote to leave the EU is changing terms on which people in Scotland are viewing prospect of independence
People just wanted to come together and talk about what’s happened.” The mood reminded her of 19 September 2014, she said, but with one crucial difference: “These are different people saying they’ll vote for independence when they couldn’t have before, and we have to welcome them with open arms.”
Only a day later, the vote to leave the EU is changing the terms on which people are viewing independence.
“A couple of weeks ago I’d have told you that we needed to wait another five to 10 years to build support [for a second independence referendum], but now I think we do it while people still feel this way.”
Since the decision to leave the EU was confirmed in early on Friday morning, pro-independence political parties and campaign groups have reported a surge in support, both from traditional allies, galvanised by recent events, and new recruits.
An SNP source said the party had been inundated with emails from people who had previously voted no, but wanted to pledge their support for a second referendum with the aim of keeping an independent Scotland part of the EU.
We clearly do think that it will change the voting intentions of a significant number of those 2 million who voted no in 2014,” he said.
Homebuyers spooked by the UK’s decision to leave the EU are pulling out of deals or attempting to renegotiate prices, according to property professionals, as the housing market suffers Brexit vote aftershocks.
Robin Paterson of Sotheby’s International Realty, which has a £22m Belgravia 7-bed home among the properties it is currently marketing, said: “The UK’s decision to leave the EU is an historic event and we should embrace this whole heartedly.
“There’s no repression or crimes against humanity that the government in Kiev has committed against the people of Crimea,” Mr. Rhodes said.
Despite the police threat, Mr. Pulpillo, who uses a wheelchair, said he went to vote “to make sure this was our feast of democracy, not our humiliation at the hands of a Spanish state that believes in repression.”
Joe Trippi, a Democratic political strategist who was a consultant for former Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, said he expected the Brexit vote to embolden American conservatives.
Laura Ingraham, an influential conservative radio host who supports Mr. Trump, said both the Republican Party in America and Britain’s Conservative Party had been torn apart by “fights over globalism.” In both cases, she said, “working-class nationalists are seeking a major change” — so far, with some success.
“This is, in some ways, is the best referendum outcome for the Conservative Party,” said Mr. Bale, “though maybe not for the country.”Scotland will push for negotiations to leave the country inside the single European market, and Ms. Sturgeon can use the threat of the referendum as leverage in dealing with the British leadership.
The Scottish cabinet will meet on Saturday to discuss further measures, she said, and the government plans to hold urgent talks with the European Commission and members of the European Union to make clear Scotland wants to remain in the bloc.
David Grey, 58, who voted for Scotland to remain in the United Kingdom in 2014 and in the European Union because of economic security, said he would “vote for independence tomorrow if I could.” England and Scotland “have now diverged significantly,” he said.
He voted for Britain to leave and said he was not concerned with the economic downturn that Britain potentially faces.
“Britain will be fine without the E.U., and Scotland, too.”“Dare to dream that the dawn is breaking on an independent United Kingdom,” Nigel Farage, the leader of the U.K. Independence Party, one of the primary forces behind the push for a referendum on leaving the European Union, told cheering supporters just after 4 a.m. Withdrawing from the European Union is a lengthy process that Mr. Cameron will largely leave to his successor.
“I think an independence referendum is now highly likely,” said Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, who said it would be “democratically unacceptable” for Scotland to be pushed out of the European Union when a majority of Scots want to stay in.
Mr. Johnson, like a number of other leaders of the push to leave the European Union, said there was no need to rush to set in motion the legal procedure — invoking a provision known as Article 50 — that would formally sever ties between Britain and the bloc.
While the nation voted 52-48% to leave the EU, the vast majority of Members of Parliament, the people elected to take such decisions in what has traditionally been a representative democracy, were declared supporters of "Remain."
The deputy mayor of Barcelona said police fired rubber bullets at people as they attempted to vote in the referendum, which Spain's top court has declared illegal.
Catalan pro-referendum supporters said they would not comply with a police order to leave the schools they are occupying to use in a vote seeking independence from Spain.
I give my full support to the people who are peacefully trying to exert their right to vote."The UK has been stripped of its last AAA rating as credit agency Standard & Poor’s warned of the economic, fiscal and constitutional risks the country now faces as a result of the EU referendum result.
Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets, said while Osborne’s statement had been measured his comments “were unable to prevent the feeling that UK politics remains in a state of paralysis, with no clear contingencies in place to deal with the fallout of a leave vote”.
“It’s no coincidence this has come off the back of the EU vote,” said a police source.
At a time when many European countries are dealing with flagging economies, Mr. Humes said he was concerned that the Brexit vote would feed a growing populist surge across the Continent, threatening to chip away at the foundation of the European Union.
As to whether he planned to make any fresh bets after the vote, Mr. Ader said, “This will take a long time to shake out.”
“My friend at Microsoft was dead wrong, as was I,” Mr. Cooperman said, referring to the source of his optimistic probability of Britain’s voting to remain.
Turning his attention to the U.S. presidential election, Oliver said the Brexit vote could be seen as a warning to Americans who are considering voting for Donald Trump.
Anti-immigrant leaflets saying "Leave the EU - no more Polish vermin" were put on cars near a school, local police said, the day after the country voted to leave the European Union
"I've spent most of the weekend talking to organizations, individuals and activists who work in the area of race hate crime, who monitor hate crime and they have shown some really disturbing early results from people being stopped in the street and saying look, we voted Leave, it's time for you to leave," she said.
"The impact of the Brexit vote is already showing in the international financial markets, adding new uncertainties for the world economy and making it more difficult for the economy to rebound," Chinese Premier Li Keqiang said Monday.
When asked why he thought so many people voted for a Brexit in Hull, he said, "people like us, no one is listening to us, that's why they voted out."
During the referendum campaign, Prime Minister David Cameron, who led the Remain campaign, repeatedly said that a Leave victory would automatically result in the triggering of Article 50.
Armstrong said the vote was "an instruction from the British people to withdraw from the European Union" and as such, "cannot be ignored."
John Curtice, a political scientist at the University of Strathclyde, said a general election was most likely to occur as a result of the government of Cameron's eventual successor losing a vote of confidence.
She also said Scotland could pursue a second referendum on leaving the United Kingdom in the event of a Brexit.
"Once that politics starts to play out a bit more, and it becomes clear that it's not just a case of the UK withdrawing from the European Union but the UK itself falling apart, that again may crystallize minds in terms of what the future looks like," he said.
The meeting, which Russia said was supposed to happen Monday, would have marked the highest-level contact between the two countries since Russian troops took up positions in Crimea, and would have come ahead of Sunday's potentially explosive vote on whether Crimea should split from Ukraine and join Russia.
The British public have voted to leave the EU in an advisory referendum – but there have been voices in business, diplomacy, politics and European polities desperately asking if the issue can be revisited.
Speaking to the BBC, she said: “If the Scottish parliament was judging this on the basis of what’s right for Scotland then the option of saying ‘look, we’re not to vote for something that’s against Scotland’s interest’, of course that’s got to be on the table.”
“Yats is the guy who’s got the economic experience, the governing experience,” Ms. Nuland said, referring to Mr. Yatsenyuk, in a call during which she also famously directed an expletive at the European Union.
The risk with Brexit is, similarly, not in the consequences we know, but in the ones that we don’t know.In changing their tune, the leaders of the anti-European Union campaign risk undermining whatever trust they had earned from the millions who voted to leave the bloc in the expectation that immigration would be cut sharply and that money now going to the European Union — which the Leave campaign said was 350 million pounds, or $465 million, a week — would be available to help finance the National Health Service.
On immigration, too, there was immediate backtracking from Mr. Johnson and Daniel Hannan, a member of the European Parliament from the Conservative Party, who told the BBC, “Frankly, if people watching think that they have voted and there is now going to be zero immigration from the E.U., they are going to be disappointed.”
Analysts say the change in tone may be necessary to begin reeling in unrealistic expectations about the changes the referendum could produce, but it also holds considerable political peril for Mr. Johnson and other Conservative Party leaders of the Leave campaign, especially with populist sentiment spreading and right-wing groups like the U.K. Independence Party eager to build support.
“It is said that those who voted Leave were mainly driven by anxieties about immigration,” Mr. Johnson wrote.
But Mr. Johnson rejected the Norway model during the campaign, and even if negotiations proved to lead to a slightly enhanced Norway, with some symbolic measures to restrict immigration of European Union citizens to Britain, the result would be a betrayal of those who voted Leave.
“I worry for senior euroskeptic leaders, because there is a misunderstanding of the vote, and that will feed voter dissatisfaction,” he said, driving many of the voters who chose a British exit to turn away from both mainstream parties and move to the populist right.
The Leave campaign don’t have a post-Brexit plan.” Then the legislator added, “Number 10 should have had a plan,” referring to the prime minister’s office.Not everyone who voted Leave is a racist, but it feels as if all the racists voted Leave.
When Daniel Hannan, a pro-Leave member of the European Parliament from the Conservative Party, was discussing the fallout from the vote on BBC radio recently, he used the words “phased repatriation.” He was referring to the return of rights from Europe to Britain, but anyone who grew up here in the 1970s and ’80s as the child of immigrants knows the word “repatriation” is freighted with ugly implications.
Ms. Le Pen’s niece, Marion Maréchal-Le Pen, a rising star in the party, said in a television interview on Monday that the so-called Brexit vote would inaugurate “a Europe where one doesn’t give up one’s sovereignty as a nation, for the benefit of stateless bureaucrats in Brussels.”
“Brexit is exactly the same as the National Front; it’s a vote based on the same sociology and demographics,” said Mr. Guilluy, whose work has earned him the anger of the French left and much attention in the news media partly because it stresses working-class cultural anxieties in the face of immigration.
Emmanuelle Reungoat, a National Front specialist at the University of Montpellier, said the British vote “was centralized around finding migrants a risk.”
London must now establish new trading relationships with its major foreign partners, and determine the immigration status of EU migrants currently working in the U.K. At the company level, aftershocks from the Brexit vote are still being felt widely: Large banks, many of which run their European operations from London's Canary Wharf, are facing some of the biggest headaches.
It has been enough to make the breakaway SNP government in Edinburgh threaten a veto which is beyond its powers and to seek to open direct talks with Brussels to stay inside the EU – for which it voted – but leave the UK.
That is not the message blue collar Britain wanted to hear, not its champions in Fleet Street’s tabloid newspapers, who had spent months accusing the remain campaign of running “Project Fear” about the risks of leaving the EU and now detected a plot to stall – or even reverse – the Brexit result.
The arithmetic told us that motivating and mobilising pro-EU voters would be nowhere near enough; we would also need the votes of people whose underlying attitudes meant they would find the leave campaign’s arguments compelling and would be hard to persuade.
Scottish voters are reconsidering their opposition to independence after the Brexit vote, the SNP’s business convener, Derek Mackay, has said, despite a poll that found a majority still favoured being part of the UK outside the EU.
“This poll is the latest to demonstrate that many no voters are reconsidering their opposition to independence now that Scotland faces being dragged out of the EU against our will,” Mackay said.
At 62%, almost two-thirds of Scots who took part in last month’s referendum on EU membership voted to remain, prompting the SNP’s leader and Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, to say that the leave result made another vote on Scottish independence highly likely.
YouGov’s Matthew Smith said: “One month after the UK’s shock decision to leave the EU, the latest YouGov research in Scotland shows no real shift towards independence.”
“The arguments for Scotland remaining a part of the UK are just as compelling as they were in 2014, in or out of the EU,” he said.
“The prime minister has been very clear that we are going to make a success of Brexit, and the focus now needs to be on collaborative working with the Scottish government as ‘Team UK’ to ensure the best possible deal for Scotland and the rest of the UK.”