The report comes the same month the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed a new round of sanctions on North Korea in response to the testing of two ballistic missiles in July that experts say may be able to reach the United States.
"Even now, I'm searching as if I'm looking for my own children -- and other coast guards feel the same way," he told CNN. "I have two medical patches on me, have difficulty breathing and my head hurts. But it hurts the most in my heart, knowing those children are still in the cold water."
Trump speaks in Sarasota, Florida, after accepting the Statesman of the Year Award at the Sarasota GOP dinner in August 2012. It was shortly before the Republican National Convention in nearby Tampa.
'The dead were wherever you looked': inside Syrian town after chemical attack Read more
This may be the most dangerous of all the lessons from this crisis. Ukraine had a sizable nuclear arsenal at the end of the Cold War, but it agreed to give it up in exchange for security guarantees. In the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, Ukraine committed itself to dismantling the world's third-largest nuclear arsenal. Russia, in exchange, vowed to respect Ukraine's borders and its independence. Now, Russia has clearly violated those commitments.  If Ukraine still had its atomic weapons, Moscow would have thought twice before seizing parts of Ukraine.
As so often happens in big international confrontations, Ukraine is devolving into a complicated mess from which no one has yet outlined a reasonable retreat acceptable to all sides.  Russia did not push into Crimea just to put its tanks in reverse and go home. The Ukrainian government can't very well tolerate a land grab within 400 miles of Kiev.  And the big Western powers, including the United States, have raised so many threats and objections, they will look weak, dishonest, or both if nothing is done now.  
But CNN's Tokyo producer Yoko Wakatsuki said broader reaction in Tokyo and across national media was more measured.
“I was born and brought up here and my first language is Japanese, but in my heart I don’t feel Japanese,” said Ryu Yuja, who teaches Korean culture and language to primary school pupils in Osaka. “I didn’t really think about my Korean roots until I went to university. The more I learned, the more important my heritage became.”
• Detainees were brought before prosecutors for interrogation with their shirts covered in blood, lawyers said.
• Up to 800 male soldiers were being held in the Ankara police headquarters sports hall, a source there said, and at least 300 showed signs of having been beaten, with bruises, cuts or broken bones, the source said. About 40 could not walk, and a woman detained separately from men had bruising on her face and torso, the source said.
