But the success of Ligo also rested on contributions from – to name a few - astronomers in Australia, mathematicians in Moscow, scientists in Birmingham, Glasgow and Cardiff, and expert groups in Italy and in Germany. “There are plenty of other prizes,” said Neil Turok, of the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics in Waterloo, Canada.
Gravitational waves: 'we can hear the universe' – live Read more
“This is transformational,” said Prof Alberto Vecchio, of the University of Birmingham, and one of the researchers at Ligo. “We have observed the universe through light so far. But we can only see part of what happens in the universe. Gravitational waves carry completely different information about phenomena in the universe. So we have opened a new way of listening to a broadcasting channel which will allow us to discover phenomena we have never seen before,” he said.
“To me it’s inconceivable that Ligo won’t sweep the board with these prizes. I have enormous confidence in the Nobel committee: they are very serious and thorough and I am confident they will do a great job of apportioning credit. It seems fairly clear – and I am an outsider – that the key players were Rainer Weiss at MIT and Ron Drever at Caltech: they were the experimentalists who invented a number of ingenious tricks to reduce the noise and increase the sensitivity of the instrument to these astonishing levels.”
And then the ringing stopped as the two holes coalesced into a single black hole, a trapdoor in space with the equivalent mass of 62 suns. All in a fifth of a second, Earth time.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Ligo co-founder Rainer Weiss, left, and Kip Thorne, right, hug on stage during a news conference at the National Press Club in Washington. Photograph: Andrew Harnik/AP

Dr. Hulse and Dr. Taylor won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1993.
Astronomers have already exploited visible light, the infrared and ultraviolet, radio waves, x-rays and even gamma-rays in their attempt to understand the mechanics of stars, the evolution of the galaxies and the expansion of the universe from an initial big bang 13.8bn years ago.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
