Not this time. The paper has not so far unambiguously editorialized in favor of leaving, but the tone was set in February, when Mr. Cameron renegotiated Britain’s ties to the European Union, before recommending a vote to remain.
But I don’t think the 1992 experience would be repeated. That devaluation was healthy because the government was relieved of its obligation to “defend” an overvalued pound with damagingly high interest rates after the breakdown of the exchange rate mechanism. This time, a large devaluation would be much less benign than in 1992, for at least three reasons.
Schilling, however, was an unlikely fascist. A father of two daughters, he and his wife Anna had lived in Italy. They had four grandchildren. Moreover, he was Jewish.
That’s especially true for London’s restaurants, bars and hotels, since Europeans make up most employees.
One of the organisations that participated in the revolution was Pravy Sektor ("Right Sector"). They are now camped out at the bottom of the Maidan, in the four-star Hotel Dnipro. Their red and black flag flies above several of the tents in Kiev's sprawling downtown protest city; young volunteers – unarmed but wearing khaki fatigues – have commandeered a boutique and a city council office. The Kremlin points to Right Sector as proof that what happened in Kiev was an ultranationalist takeover.
Lim, the rescued student, told YTN he heard the bang before the ship began to list. The tremors knocked shipping containers off balance, he said.
"Let's stop pretending what this European project is," the UKIP leader said in his last speech before Thursday's vote. "They have an anthem, they are building an army, they've already got their own police force and of course they've got a flag."
A change on free movement is the chief route back to its evaporating working-class vote, as Yvette Cooper, the former shadow home secretary, pointed out in a speech on Tuesday. For this to happen, the EU would need to offer an “emergency brake”, something Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, has steadfastly refused in her talks with Cameron. But many in the Foreign Office hope she would relent, or would be forced to do by the French and Italians.
Failure?
The U.S. ship also has divers aboard who could help with searching if South Korea's government requests it, he told CNN's "Erin Burnett OutFront."
