In recent years the Dutch Turkish community has become increasingly polarised between supporters and opponents of Erdoğan. About 400,000 Turkish citizens live in the Netherlands, along with 100,000 ethnic Turks from other countries, making up about 2.5% of the population. Rotterdam’s mayor, Ahmed Aboutaleb, appealed for calm within the community at the weekend and said he was prepared to mediate between the two sides if necessary. “Don’t import the conflict: it’s bad enough that these tensions exist,” he said.
In Vienna, where about 4,000 people demonstrated outside the Turkish embassy on Friday night, the foreign minister, Sebastian Kurz said: “In Austria we have a freedom to demonstrate and that’s a good thing. But I expect of people who live here that they are loyal towards their new home country and respectfully refrain from importing political conflicts into Austria,” said the conservative politician, who is in charge of foreign affairs as well as integration, in an interview with Kronen Zeitung newspaper.
This is where most economists say the biggest cost of Brexit could lie. If Britain stays in the EEA, little will change economically. But leaving will create uncertainty and outcomes will depend on what the government can negotiate, they say.
“There are clear signs that these incidents are a direct consequence of the recent developments in Turkey,” the organisation said in a statement. In Zaandam, the headquarters of Animo, another Gülen-oriented organisation, was targeted on Friday night by a group of about 20 young people who smashed the windows and chanted pro-Erdoğan slogans.
This leaves the new Ukrainian government with a very difficult choice. It is obliged by the constitution to defend the territorial integrity of Ukraine, to re-establish public order in Crimea, and to guarantee the safety of its citizens there, irrespective of their ethnic background. However, the central government is only just regaining control over the situation, and faces enormous political, economic and social challenges. Its resources are already stretched without having to deal with a strong separatist movement and its even stronger external backer. What is more, Europe and the U.S. will be of very limited help in confronting Crimean separatists and their Russian masters. 
She watched a procession of mothers winding through the still-smoking barricades of the Maidan, carrying photographs of their dead, each photograph surrounded by a crown of thorns, mixing cries of “Glory to the heroes!” with patriotic songs.
Turkey has demanded their return to stand trial for participation in Friday’s coup attempt. The eight deny involvement and have applied for asylum, saying they fear for their safety amid widespread purges in the aftermath of the attempted overthrow of the government.
Turkey’s crackdown on military personnel and judges in the wake of Friday’s failed coup has been condemned in unusually strong terms by the German government. “Germany and the EU have an unambiguous position: we categorically reject the death penalty,” said Merkel’s spokesperson Steffen Seibert on Monday morning. “A country that has the death penalty cannot be a member of the European Union. The introduction of the death penalty in Turkey would therefore mean the end of EU accession talks.”
I was a helpless mother with nothing but the calm tone of my voice to soothe a scared child. I was six years old during the 1980 coup in Turkey. I remembered how scared I was when armed soldiers came to take my dad from my house. He was 37. I remember vividly how he tried to hide their guns from my eyes. My voice became calmer, sadder, closer to my dad’s.
Video and photos on social media show large crowds marching through the streets, some taunting soldiers as Turkish military fire guns in the air.
