"But it is not a negotiation, unfortunately," said Poroshenko, a billionaire businessman and former Ukrainian foreign minister. "We try to do our best to use any opportunity for peaceful negotiation. But ... we don't have any sign of hope ... from the Russian side."
Ukraine's take: Russia has sent military ships, helicopters and cargo planes to deploy 16,000 troops into Crimea since February 24, Sergeyev told the United Nations on Monday. 
"We should not force our allies to remain dependent on Putin for their energy needs," Boehner said, describing the current approval process as a "de facto ban."
There is a long and storied tradition of governments inventing a legal premise to justify their actions.  During the Cold War, President Reagan justified U.S. intervention in Grenada as necessary to protect Americans living on the island.  Reagan also defended U.S. military support in Nicaragua as collective self-defense requested by El Salvador. These claims were just as credible as Putin's claims, which is to say: not very.
BELARUS Striped areas are predominantly Russian-speaking provinces won by Viktor F. Yanukovych, Ukraine's former president. POLAND Novi Petrivtsi Kiev Lviv RUSSIA Dnieper River These provinces were won by the opposition in the 2010 presidential election. Kharkiv UKRAINE Donetsk MOLDOVA ROMANIA Sea of Azov CRIMEA Sevastopol Danube River Balaklava Black Sea 100 Miles BULGARIA
The newly installed, pro-European interim central government is shaky, at best. Ousted President Viktor Yanukovych fled more than a week ago in the wake of protests in Kiev's Independence Square, where snipers from nearby rooftops killed scores of demonstrators.
The loan guarantees announced Tuesday will help Ukraine move forward with an assistance package from the International Monetary Fund, which is calling for the country to raise energy prices.
Yanukovych, she said, abandoned his post last month and was then voted out of office by Ukraine's democratically elected parliament.
Turchinov, a longtime ally of opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko, has promised a new interim government by Tuesday.
Flowers and flags marked the spot of the killings. One person left a poem that read, "Mother, I'm sorry I had to go. I was shot by the police because I couldn't turn back."
