Following his remarks, he was pelted with eggs by members of the public. Police said two men, aged 26 and 32, had been arrested and charged with common assault over the incident.
Q&A Why does the Spanish government say the Catalan referendum is illegal? Show Hide The Spanish government argues that any referendum on Catalan independence would be illegal because the country’s 1978 constitution makes no provision for a vote on self-determination. The Spanish constitutional court, which has suspended the referendum law pushed through the Catalan parliament in September, is looking into whether the law breaches the constitution. In March this year, the former Catalan president Artur Mas was banned from holding public office for two years after being found guilty of disobeying the constitutional court by holding a symbolic independence referendum three years ago.
Today, the leaders of this democratic project stand accused of rebellion and face the severest punishment possible under the Spanish penal code – the same as for cases of terrorism or murder: 30 years in prison. The vice-president and seven Catalan government ministers have been in prison since last Thursday, as well as two Catalan civic leaders, while orders for the rest of the Catalan government to be detained have been issued. This is a colossal outrage that will have serious consequences.
"I think we have made it very clear that if they [the police] continue the violent way of clearing up the place, we will have further actions," Leung told public broadcaster Radio Television Hong Kong (RTHK).
They said in a statement that they would “take resolute enforcement actions” and would “use minimum level of force to stop any violent and illegal acts, so as to uphold law and order”.
Police arrested at least five protesters, according to the Hong Kong Federation of Students, one of the groups that has played an important role in organising the protest movement, which is seeking free elections in the former British colony.
Catalonia is right now the only territory in the European Union that has been denied the supreme law its citizens voted for; the parliament that its citizens elected; the president that this parliament elected; and the government that this president appointed in the exercise of his powers. Acting in an arbitrary, undemocratic, and in my view, unlawful manner, the Spanish state decided to dissolve the Catalan parliament in the middle of the legislative term, to dismiss the president and the Catalan government, to intervene in our self-government and the institutions that the Catalans have been building in our nation for centuries. It committed a brutal judicial offensive to bring about the mass imprisonment and criminalisation of candidates promoting political ideas that, just two years ago, obtained historically high levels of public support.

A committee of British MPs has been warned that they will be denied entry to Hong Kong if they try to go ahead with a planned visit to the former British colony.
Mr. Rajoy paid homage to Mr. Maza for what he called in a post on Twitter “a life of work at the service of the state.”
