The social movement is not dissimilar to #Illridewithyou, a hashtag campaign that emerged out of Sydney in 2014 following a flare up of anti-Muslim sentiment after a gunman took hostages in a CBD cafe.
Boston, a town of 67,000 residents, relies heavily on immigrants to work the nearby vegetable and potato fields and prepare food sold in British supermarkets for the minimum wage. Few immigrants claim welfare benefits. Their large presence — by some estimates immigrants from Central and Eastern Europe constitute more than 10 percent of the local population — has helped transform the region into a center for Britain’s agro-industry.
Explaining the symbolism behind her idea, 30-year-old Allison tells CNN: "There's a woman in a hijab, she gets on the bus and there's an empty seat. She sees that there is a person wearing a safety pin sitting next to it (and) she just knows that she can sit there and they will not hassle her.
Ready to be your #SafetyPin on the bus,in streets,wherever you are,my fellow foreign-born friends ❤️#LoveOverFear pic.twitter.com/4wqzMCHs2N — Dancing Psychiatrist (@Lollindialogue) June 29, 2016
"It very clearly wasn't intended as a compliment. He was saying 'I see you, I've noticed you, that you are foreign, and I would like to tell you that you are foreign."
London (CNN) Police in Britain have recorded a dramatic rise in racist attacks in the wake of Brexit, with five times the usual number of incidents reported in the week since the country voted in a referendum to leave the European Union.
One of our best doctors had to suffer "you should be sent back to where you came from" abuse today. Disgusting and unacceptable. — Michael Green (@PostcardsFromAE) June 30, 2016
"By all means write letters, go on marches, do everything you can. But this is just a quiet way to show, 'Hey it's fine, I'm with you.'"
Economist Marianna Koli has lived in the UK since moving from her native Finland when she was 18. Days after the Brexit vote, she experienced what she says was her first racist incident in 16 years.
'You have a duty to intervene'
