EU leaders have backed the Madrid government in its handling of the crisis, which Rajoy insists is an internal matter.
Those detained were eventually released, but they are expected to be charged with civil disobedience and the misuse of public funds to organize an illegal vote. On Friday, the Spanish government announced that it would send more police officers to Catalonia to maintain order and block a referendum; additional officers are being billeted in ferries off the Catalan coast. And over the weekend, Madrid announced that it would centralize the command of all police operations in Catalonia, including the region’s autonomous police force.
At Sunday's rally, 37-year-old Moises Santos, who lives near Barcelona, said he saw the Catalan Parliament's vote Friday as invalid and blamed the independence agenda for dividing people in the region.
In some of Almodóvar’s wild, dark comedies, the scenario reaches a point where the viewer thinks only folly is left. But then something happens, a realisation, a cathartic moment of understanding and, yes, love. Self-destruction is averted. Feuds end. There is reconciliation. May the dizziness around Catalonia be like an Almodóvar movie.
"In this moment, we need to be serene and careful, but we also need to have confidence that the state has the tools, backed by the law and reason, [to] peacefully and reasonably go back to legality and take away threats to democracy," he said.
He may also be trying to push Mr. Rajoy to fulfill his pledge to put an end to the secessionist challenge, which could in turn help galvanize Catalonia’s independence movement if Mr. Rajoy uses emergency measures to reduce the region’s level of autonomy.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest A giant banner displaying the word ‘yes’ in different languages. Photograph: Albert Gea/Reuters
In two weeks, Catalans will go to the polls to vote in a referendum on whether to secede from Spain and form an independent republic. Or will they?
The same can be said of the recent arrest of two leaders of pro-independence civil society organisations, now accused of “sedition”. That was an inflammatory move. The crowds on Saturday will no doubt brandish slogans about “political prisoners” – an expression even the moderate mayor of Barcelona, Ada Colau, is using. So now we have martyrs to the cause.
Some police from outside the region have been billeted on cruise liners moored outside the Port of Barcelona — and turned into objects of separatist derision because the ships are decorated with Looney Tunes characters.
