Farage, a member of the European parliament since 1999, derided his fellow members who booed him Tuesday when he spoke at the Council meeting in Brussels, the first since U.K. voters approved the exit referendum.
“Uncertainty during the run-up to the referendum saw many employers suspend permanent hiring and instead bring in temporary, contractor or interim staff to hedge against potential changes to their growth prospects,” said REC’s chief executive, Kevin Green.
The plant is an important part of the UK government’s plan to keep the lights on and emissions down, but is at high risk from a change of leadership, said energy analyst Nick Butler: “Osborne has been a powerful supporter of new nuclear. He has tolerated both a sharp rise in costs, even at a time when the price of every other form of energy has been falling, and successive delays that leave the project years behind schedule and billions of pounds over budget. On the assumption that he joins David Cameron in retiring in three months time, his successor may take a tougher line and pursue different options.”
"Europeans should say: look, there are rational complaints, we are going to fix them for all of Europeans, not for Britain alone, but for everyone else. Maybe you can even reverse Brexit," he told Il Sole 24 Ore.
In a sign of growing radicalism among activists, SNP delegates voted overwhelmingly for a motion calling for the royal family to lose its automatic share of profits from the crown estate, a state body which owns coastal seabed, royal parks, Ascot racecourse and shopping centres.

My third and most important lesson: The benefits of globalization aren’t universal, and even if they are positive, they aren’t well understood. This was, at its core, a communication failure. For the well educated and privileged, European Union membership has been a boon. But for others, globalization has been very different. In certain British communities, there is a sense that immigration from Central and Eastern Europe has driven down wages and strained public services. But there is little understanding in those communities that European Union money has, in many cases, brought jobs, like the Nissan factory in Sunderland.
Jonathan Gaventa, from thinktank E3G, said that legal EU targets for renewable energy for 2020 had been a major catalyst for investment, but that the bloc’s 2030 target is not nationally binding: “So current UK renewable energy investment is driven by the underlying need for clean energy in the UK. This need does not change.”
JUST WATCHED David Cameron announces impending resignation Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH David Cameron announces impending resignation 00:50
Britain might be leaving the EU, but Larry is remaining at Downing Street.
