The report comes the same month the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed a new round of sanctions on North Korea in response to the testing of two ballistic missiles in July that experts say may be able to reach the United States.
"We have a very good relationship with China and with the President of China. We are working on different things," Trump said. "I can't tell you, obviously, what I'm working on. But believe me, the people of this country will be very, very safe."Zhao said, in an effort to deter North Korea, Japan could provoke an arms race in East Asia with South Korea, China and even Russia.
They send their children to schools affiliated with Chongryon – a residents’ association that serves as North Korea’s de facto embassy – where they follow the regime’s curriculum and study in classrooms adorned with portraits of the Kim dynasty.
The country's current President Moon Jae-in, who was elected in May, is seen as more open to dialogue than his hawkish predecessor.
Others were more aggressive. Pyongyang resident Ri Hyon Il said before the announcement that "real action" was needed.
The constitution came into effect in 1947, after Japan's defeat in World War II, and says "land, sea and air forces, as well as other war potential will never be maintained." The Japanese military is currently known as the Self-Defense Forces.
In mid-April, Abe said Japan's security situation in the region was "getting increasingly severe," referring to the North Korean threat. But repeated polls among the Japanese public have found no appetite for constitutional change.
"The international community needs to unite and send clear message after North Korea's dangerous provocation," Abe told reporters. "We must let North Korea understand there is no bright future for North Korea if it continues in this way."
There were calls from various quarters to boycott the finals because of the repressive measures being undertaken by the military junta, which took charge in a coup in March 1976 and would rule until 1983.
