He cited Yanukovych's comments as "signs that he is not in good standing with his current host."
Crackdown criticized
The sight of the Black Hawk not only entering Greek airspace but requesting to make an emergency landing after issuing a May Day alert unnerved the leftist-led Athens government and military top brass, who immediately demanded the scrambling of F-16 fighter jets.
In a rambling news conference that lasted for more than an hour, the ousted leader spoke in Russian instead of the Ukrainian that he has used at official functions.
The eight, who had initially removed the insignia from their uniforms but have since been identified as two colonels, four captains and two sergeants, left court handcuffed to each other in pairs.
Who knows, but keep an eye on Crimea. Pro-Russian forces still hold several government buildings, and lawmakers there have voted out a government they saw as too pro-Kiev. With so many ethnic Russians and a big Russian military presence there, it's a potential flashpoint.
"Everything that I can do, I will do to the end of my life to be with the people of Ukraine -- not with those nationalists, not with those bandits, but the people of Ukraine," he said, adding that Western countries, including the United States, bore some of the blame for the unrest.
As alarm grew during the day, Russia dismissed efforts by the new Ukrainian leadership to discuss the future of Crimea, a territory the size of Belgium which, despite a large Russian majority, has been part of Ukraine since independence two decades ago. Since 1991, Russia has maintained its own fleet at Sevastopol, a force that dwarfs Ukraine's own units in Crimea. The Russian foreign ministry said troop movements were "required to protect deployment places of the Black Sea fleet in Ukraine" and said the manoeuvres were fully in line with bilateral accords.
He says lower-ranking officers launched the coup, rebelling against senior officers.
Yanukovych said he was "ashamed" that he had not been able to maintain stability in his country.
