In Brussels, Belgium, NATO ambassadors held an emergency meeting on Ukraine.
Officers did not remove all of the protesters and between 50 and 100 remained in the square late on Sunday night.
The Campaign Against the Arms Trade, CAAT, said the UK had granted six licences worth £180,000 to sell teargas to Hong Kong in the past four years, as police stockpiled canisters. The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills said it did not comment on individual companies. However, it is understood that the CS gas covered by the licences over recent years has all been exported to Hong Kong.
“The government is doing what it can to avoid provoking any internal divisions,” Steven Pifer, a former American ambassador to Ukraine who is now at the Brookings Institution, said in a telephone interview. “They need people who have credibility in eastern Ukraine. The risk is this will be seen as business as usual by putting wealthy people in government. That has been part of the problem for the past 22 years.”

"I'm not a prophet," he replied. "I think Hong Kong's political system will become fairer, more democratic and more open.
“You have violated the principles of ‘one country, two systems,’ challenged the authority of the central party, ignored the Basic Law, and earned fistfuls of cash only to then turn and scold your motherland,” said the commentary, singling out Ms. Ho, Mr. Wong and a Hong Kong actor, Chapman To, who have been among the most visible celebrities at the protest sites. “Is this how you treat the country that gave birth to you and raised you?”
"The leaders in Beijing are afraid that if they give democracy to Hong Kong, then other parts of China, like Xinjiang and Tibet, will also ask for it," said a 17-year old female high school student who lives in Taipei. 
Lester Shum, the deputy secretary-general of the Hong Kong Federation of Students, one of the protest’s organising groups, urged the police to exercise restraint in a speech to the crowd. “We’re not your enemies,” he said; the crowd applauded.
RUSSIA Kiev UKRAINE Lviv Kharkiv UKRAINE Donetsk Sea of Azov CRIMEA CRIMEA RUSSIA Simferopol Airport Simferopol Perevalnoye Belbek Airport Sevastopol Black Sea Balaklava Yalta 50 Miles
