“We are still evaluating it,” Mr. Fischer said on Friday. “My guess is that it will be less important for the U.S. than the countries directly involved — almost just logically so. We will wait and see.”Sergei Zheleznyak
"People are concerned what is going to happen after the referendum," she said. "People are concerned that the Russian army will use force, guns to push (the) Ukrainian army from Crimea."
Ostensibly, after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, when Osama bin Laden enjoyed sanctuary in the Taliban-ruled Afghanistan, the years of combat were supposed to deny a haven to Qaeda terrorists hatching plots against the West. But the fighting did not pre-empt the resurgence of the Taliban or spare British citizens the violence of terrorism linked to Pakistan on their own soil.
The EU is now looking at other possible financial sanctions in case the crisis escalates – for example if Russia moves into eastern Ukraine.
One man died around the time of the protests in front of Parliament, the Crimean Ministry of Health said on its website. The man had no visible signs of injury, and early indications point to a heart attack, it said. Seven people sought medical help.
Russia's lower house of parliament overwhelmingly approved a treaty Thursday to annex the Black Sea peninsula of Crimea from Ukraine, prompting tougher sanctions from the United States.
With the annexation of Crimea considered a fait accompli, Kiev and the west are now looking with anxiety to eastern Ukraine, where a number of protests by elements of the Russian-speaking population have ended in violence and led the Russian foreign ministry to speak about the possible necessity of "defending" Russian speakers there.
Dozens of armed men seized the regional government administration buildings in Ukraine's southern Crimean region Thursday and raised the Russian flag in a challenge to the Eastern European country's new leaders.
Sanctions require full European participation. Much has been made of Europe's need for Russian natural gas. But gas sales are  a double-edged sword. Russia needs its European customers. America's newfound gas riches could help Europe gain independence from Moscow.
