French spies amassed and publicly released evidence last month that indicated the Assad regime had used toxic sarin gas on the town of Khan Sheikhun, an attack that provoked the US to launch missiles on a Syrian air base in its first targeted attack against the Syrian president’s forces.
The U.N. vote, held Thursday, saw 100 countries back the nonbinding resolution, with 11 opposed and 58 abstaining.
Speaking to the state-run newspaper Rossiskaya Gazeta, in comments first noted by the Moscow Times, Seagal described western policy on Ukraine as "idiotic". He said Putin's desire "to protect the Russian-speaking people of Crimea, his assets, and the Russian Black Sea military base in Sevastopol … [was] very reasonable".
Tensions between Moscow and Kiev have escalated since Russia reclaimed the Crimea region after a referendum this month that overwhelmingly supported the annexation. The United States and its allies have pledged to isolate Russia for its actions.
Protesters gather in Barcelona's city center on Saturday.
Polls indicate that at least 75 to 80 percent of Russians support the annexation of Crimea, a piece of Russia until it was granted to Ukraine as a gift in 1954. Like many, Mr. Shakhnazarov mentioned the potential rise of fascism in Ukraine — part of the daily news diet on Russian television — as well as similar liberation struggles in Scotland and Kosovo.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
The property is still officially owned by Artek, whose new chief executive, Igor Leli, was appointed a month ago after a purge of officials still loyal to Kiev. But Artek's spokesperson told the Guardian that "a sale to a private individual is possible and more information will be publicly available soon".
"Putin has his second shot at the dacha, and the goal is wide open," said Maik Lvovskiy, an investigative journalist who followed the 2004 paper trail that led all the way from Yalta to Moscow. "If he pursued it before, then I can't see why he wouldn't take it now; there are absolutely no obstacles in his way at all. He can pretty much walk straight through the front door," Lvovskiy said.
"The counterproductive initiative with the General Assembly's resolution only complicates efforts to stabilize the internal political crisis in Ukraine," the ministry said in a statement.
