Turkey’s crackdown on military personnel and judges in the wake of Friday’s failed coup has been condemned in unusually strong terms by the German government. “Germany and the EU have an unambiguous position: we categorically reject the death penalty,” said Merkel’s spokesperson Steffen Seibert on Monday morning. “A country that has the death penalty cannot be a member of the European Union. The introduction of the death penalty in Turkey would therefore mean the end of EU accession talks.”
Uniformed soldiers block the famous Bosphorus Bridge connecting the European and Asian sides of Istanbul. Cars flow from the European side to the Asian side, but soldiers and military vehicles block the path to the European side.
Photo
While secular and liberal Turks generally opposed the coup, it was Mr. Erdogan’s supporters who flooded the streets and gathered at Istanbul’s airport Saturday morning to push out the occupying army. They mostly yelled religious slogans and chants in support of Mr. Erdogan, not of democracy itself.
Gunfire rings out as a confused nation watches.
The sight of the Black Hawk not only entering Greek airspace but requesting to make an emergency landing after issuing a May Day alert unnerved the leftist-led Athens government and military top brass, who immediately demanded the scrambling of F-16 fighter jets.
6:30 a.m.: As dawn breaks, Erdogan is hailed by a throng of cheering supporters. He declares the coup over and says it was treason.
Turkey’s failed coup has also raised tensions in the Netherlands emigrant community. A cultural centre in Rotterdam run by the Nida Foundation, which is affiliated to the Gülen movement, was pelted with stones for two nights in a row over the weekend.
For anyone residing in Adana, Friday night was extraordinary. Many people protested against the coup attempt on streets throughout the country, however, these demonstrations were motivated by a slowly imposed ideology of a religious ruling class.
In Vienna, where about 4,000 people demonstrated outside the Turkish embassy on Friday night, the foreign minister, Sebastian Kurz said: “In Austria we have a freedom to demonstrate and that’s a good thing. But I expect of people who live here that they are loyal towards their new home country and respectfully refrain from importing political conflicts into Austria,” said the conservative politician, who is in charge of foreign affairs as well as integration, in an interview with Kronen Zeitung newspaper.
