Physicists have announced the discovery of gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric of spacetime that were first anticipated by Albert Einstein a century ago.
Gravitational waves: 'we can hear the universe' – live Read more
“This observation is truly incredible science and marks three milestones for physics: the direct detection of gravitational waves, the first detection of a binary black hole, and the most convincing evidence to date that nature’s black holes are the objects predicted by Einstein’s theory.”
“This is transformational,” said Prof Alberto Vecchio, of the University of Birmingham, and one of the researchers at Ligo. “We have observed the universe through light so far. But we can only see part of what happens in the universe. Gravitational waves carry completely different information about phenomena in the universe. So we have opened a new way of listening to a broadcasting channel which will allow us to discover phenomena we have never seen before,” he said.

Baker agrees. “Capturing these general relativistic effects is important because as our telescope technology is improves, so does the accuracy of our astronomical data. They may be only small corrections to the Newtonian predictions, but we should include them to make totally rigorous calculations for the next generation of telescopes.” She adds: “Also they have a bearing on ruling out models of dark matter and dark energy, arguably the biggest problems in current cosmology.”Ironically, Einstein didn't think gravitational waves would be discovered.
"A physicist is always looking for a flaw in a theory. And the only way to find a flaw is to test it," Marka told CNN. "Einstein's theory did not present any flaws to us yet, and that is really scary. Physicists are very (skeptical) of flawless theories because then we have nothing to do."
Columbia University physicist Marka, who's been working on the project for more than a decade, said the discovery will open up new horizons, including direct tests of Einstein's general theory. Those could further support it -- or force physicists to come up with new ideas.
Einstein would be surprised
