After the Council meeting ended, diplomats said that they were continuing to negotiate and that no vote had been scheduled.
In a statement, Cambridgeshire Detective Superintendent Martin Brunning said police were working with the Polish community and warned that anyone caught distributing racist leaflets could face up to seven years in prison.
Still, Mr. Cameron entered the campaign with the force of economic experts, President Obama, European allies and big business behind him. But as ever, referendums are not about the question asked but the political mood at the time, and the political mood is sour.She did not provide further details. But the hint of acting alone was striking, suggesting that she was willing to articulate a position even before her boss.
Europe will have to “reorganize itself in a system of different degrees of association,” said Karl Kaiser, a Harvard professor and former director of the German Council on Foreign Relations. “Europe does have an interest in keeping Britain in the single market, if possible, and in an ad hoc security relationship.”
“If Parliament judges that a second referendum is the best or only way to protect our place in Europe, it must have the option to hold one in that time scale,” Ms. Sturgeon said. “I can confirm today that in order to protect that position we will begin to prepare the legislation that would be required to enable a new independence referendum to take place if and when Parliament so decides.”
Turkey's prime minister declares attempted coup is over Read more
The consultancy Oxford Economics said interest rates could be slashed to 0% within weeks. Morgan Stanley analysts said European and UK stocks would fall up to 10% over the coming months and sterling would fall to between $1.25 and $1.30.
“I wonder why the rescuers who first got to the ship didn’t do anything about those 100 or 200 I think were trapped inside the ship,” he said. “They were just picking up those already on the top of the ship.”
“Britain was already independent,” the exasperated Oliver said. “In fact, it’s what many other countries celebrate their independence from.”
