Obama's comments were broadcast as Russia dismissed a U.N. General Assembly resolution that branded Crimea's secession referendum invalid, calling it "counterproductive."
French spies amassed and publicly released evidence last month that indicated the Assad regime had used toxic sarin gas on the town of Khan Sheikhun, an attack that provoked the US to launch missiles on a Syrian air base in its first targeted attack against the Syrian president’s forces.
Wisteria's neighbours are delighted at the prospect of Putin taking his summer breaks on their doorsteps. "We will welcome our president with open arms," said Georgiy Zaporozhny, a clergyman sitting in the sun-drenched courtyard of the Russian Orthodox church next door to the grounds of Dacha No 1. "He has, thank God, saved us from this fascism that has impregnated Europe, and taken us finally back to the motherland. He is a hero of the people here."The Commons defence committee said this week that the crisis in Ukraine underlined the continuing threat of state-on-state conflict, warning that Britain's national security depended upon its ability to maintain a credible deterrent against a full range threats from cyber-attack to a nuclear strike.
The Ukraine Defense Ministry told CNN that the nation has an ocean dolphin facility, but declined to provide details, saying they're classified.
This region is home to sweeping expanses of farmland and scattered forests, classic terrain for a tank war -- the kind of scenario both Soviet and NATO forces drilled for during the Cold War years. 
Protesters gather in Barcelona's city center on Saturday.
Russia's actions in Ukraine have been widely condemned by the West and prompted concern in Kiev and other former Soviet states that further incursions may follow.
Seagal and Putin are said to have bonded over a shared interest in martial arts. The actor, who recently helped Russia's government relaunch a nationwide fitness programme which had been dormant since the Soviet era, said he considered the president as "a brother".“This awful notion of ‘national traitors’ appearing suddenly as if it is a kind of call from the old and gloomy past, from the Stalinist era when this was a crime against the state,” said Irina D. Prokhorova, the editor and publisher of The New Literary Observer. Last December, Ms. Prokhorova replaced her brother, Mikhail D. Prokhorov, the tycoon who owns the Brooklyn Nets, as the head of a fledgling political party, Civic Platform.
