For Wong, the problem was more serious: he wasn’t at a football match, but playing a leading role in the organisation of the pro-democracy protests that have shaken his city over the past week. And he wasn’t just worried the network would be overloaded – he was worried the authorities would block it on purpose.
One thing that protesters complained about was that everyone could read the traffic, including opponents of the Occupy movement. Since then FireChat has added a verification component that stamps the messages as coming from a particular user or group.
The city maintains an independent judiciary, and residents enjoy greater civil liberties than residents of mainland China. Hong Kong has a robust tradition of free speech.
Hong Kong’s mixed cultural heritage runs deep even among the police officers now charged with enforcing Beijing’s will in the territory. Ethnically, the 30,000-strong force is 99 percent Hong Kong Chinese, but its culture is eclectically Western, from its hierarchical structure to its off-duty rituals. At an official dinner a few years ago, I commented that the ceremonial garb included distinctive plaids from Scotland, including the bright red Mackintosh tartan. An officer next to me shook his head. “No,” he said, “that tartan signifies Hong Kong Island officers, and the one over there is from Kowloon.” Then a bagpipe player escorted a man carrying a pewter tray with a shot glass of amber liquid — a wee dram not of whisky, but of Chinese tea.
Other countries for which Britain has licensed the sale of teargas produced by British companies include the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Oman, Jordan and Pakistan.Hong Kong, as anyone who has lived or worked in the city knows, is simultaneously China, and not China. 
China temporarily suspended visas for group tours on Wednesday, a move that could have additional effects on hotel and restaurant receipts in the city. Such tours account for about 30 percent of all mainland visitors to Hong Kong.

The full impact of the protests on transport is likely to be felt more this week. Many people were away or on leave for a lot of last week due to two public holidays.
Nury Vittachi is a columnist and author based in Hong Kong.