“Most of them wouldn’t get out of bed for the money we earn,” added Ms. Pawelec, standing behind a row of beer taps as the song “We Didn’t Start the Fire” blared from loudspeakers.
"What this country doesn't need right now is more political instability on top of the market turmoil," Foster said.As rescuers searched the frigid water for nearly 300 people who remained unaccounted for, witnesses told horrific stories of their final minutes on the sinking ship.   
Ladbrokes has admitted that betting markets got the EU referendum outcome completely wrong and will have to “face up to some tough questions”.

An article last year examining his swift rise in the Fatherland Party, published on a local news site, News24UA, noted that his success in the rough political arena was belied by his gentle reputation: “Everyone calls him a rabbit, a bunny or ‘our white and fluffy Senya.’ How did it happen that people associate a leader of today’s opposition forces with a meek, innocent animal?”Crimean Tatars – a Sunni Muslim ethnic group that ruled in Crimea before it was captured by Russia in 1783 – have backed the maidan since its early days and now decisively oppose secession of the peninsula, let alone its accession to the Russian Federation. They still remember how, in 1944, their people were forcibly moved to central Asia under Stalin's orders with their land and houses transferred to ethnic Russians. That is where the Russian demographic domination of Crimea stems from.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said Monday that U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry postponed a face-to-face meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin to discuss American proposals, which Moscow has effectively rejected, on solving the crisis.
"I spoke to one gentleman who had been campaigning for 20 years, who was very, very pleased. The remain supporters left the area pretty quickly."
"I'm a little bit tired, but we're so overwhelmed at the support," he said. "There's certainly lots of smiling faces here now."
