What happened in Khan Sheikhoun "is an almost exact replication of what we saw in the summer of 2013," Lister told CNN, adding that it had targeted a key staging area for an opposition push into northern Hama late last month.
"The referendum doesn't itself trigger Brexit," said Kenneth Armstrong, professor of European law at the University of Cambridge. "It still requires the decision of a government."
If you are a British citizen, or an Irish citizen who was born in Northern Ireland, and are living abroad, you will need to contact the local electoral registration office for the address where you were last registered in the UK.
The Turkish prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, is considered in Washington an erratic and unreliable ally against Isis, only allowing its Nato partner access to Incirlik to fight the group in 2015.
A British citizen living overseas who has been registered to vote in the UK in the past 15 years.
Here is a full list of European Union countries, Commonwealth countries, British overseas territories and British crown dependencies (pdf).
"It's much more plausible that Assad, who's used nerve agents in the past, is using them again," he said.
In London, the Polish and Social Cultural Association woke on Sunday morning to find their front doors sprayed with an abusive message.
"The master of the ship, the captain, may well have determined that the vessel was going to remain level and might sink at a steady rate that would allow for the safe exit of people off of the vessel using life rafts, for example, and that would be the preferred way to go," he said. "It may well be that the announcement was made while the captain was under the impression that the vessel was not going to sink quickly. And that events overtook their ability to communicate a change in direction to the passengers."
The EU remains the most important market for UK goods, so it is possible that any competitive gains from a cheaper pound would be negated by trade barriers in the event of a vote to leave. Much would depend on the size of the depreciation in the pound, whether the depreciation was sustained, and the deal struck with Britain’s former EU partners about access to the single market.
