So, space is like the ocean and all the planets, stars and galaxies are like boats and objects sitting on its surface. Even though we can’t feel it, there are waves in space that make the Earth bob every so slightly. Those waves are caused by gravity.
Gravitational waves: 'we can hear the universe' – live Read more
According to the equations physicists have settled on, gravitational waves would compress space in one direction and stretch it in another as they traveled outward.
Think of gravity like a magnet, and everything in space has it. The bigger the object, the stronger the magnet. The sun is really big – big enough to attract the Earth, and the Earth attracts the moon, and because of gravity, they’re all attracted to each other. It’s like they all want to hug and be close. But they can’t, so they send out little waves instead.
Dr. Thorne then recruited Dr. Drever, a gifted experimentalist from the University of Glasgow, to start a gravitational wave program at Caltech. Dr. Drever wanted to use light — laser beams bouncing between precisely positioned mirrors — to detect the squeeze and stretch of a passing wave.
Others could not duplicate his result, but few doubted that gravitational waves were real. Dr. Weber’s experiment inspired a generation of scientists to look harder for Einsteinian marks on the universe.
“This observation is truly incredible science and marks three milestones for physics: the direct detection of gravitational waves, the first detection of a binary black hole, and the most convincing evidence to date that nature’s black holes are the objects predicted by Einstein’s theory.”
“These are the three guys who did the groundwork, and in the next 25 years developed the stuff, convinced the National Science Foundation to fund them, and pushed it forward,” he said. “It’s difficult, because there are all these other people who have been working on it. I have a very romantic view that these three guys should have it – but it may be unfair.”
Dr. Thorne of Caltech and Dr. Weiss of M.I.T. first met in 1975, Dr. Weiss said, when they had to share a hotel room during a meeting in Washington. Dr. Thorne was already a renowned black-hole theorist, but he was looking for new experimental territory to conquer. They stayed up all night talking about how to test general relativity and debating how best to search for gravitational waves.
The Berlin-born Rainer Weiss was one of the intellects behind Nasa’s cosmic microwave background experiment that detected the tiny fluctuations in the temperature of intergalactic space in the 1990s, and an experimenter who introduced laser interferometry to gravitational wave observation. Ronald Drever, for many years at Caltech, co-invented the mechanism for stabilising the Ligo laser and then returned to his native Scotland: sadly, he was too ill to attend the press event that celebrated the announcement on Thursday.
