The first rule: Portray your cause as a struggle for democracy and human rights first, national self-determination second. This helps get around the fact that there is no legal right, under international or often domestic law, for secession.
"FC Barcelona in remaining faithful to its historic commitment to the defence of the nation, to democracy, to freedom of speech, and to self-determination, condemns any act that may impede the free exercise of these rights," it said in a statement posted to its official Twitter account.
Though many in South Ossetia had hoped to be absorbed into Russia, the Kremlin has so far refused to consider annexation, most likely because it would prove destabilizing for Russia’s turbulent Caucasus region, Mr. Malashenko said. Despite 15 months of lobbying by Moscow, only four nations followed Russia’s lead in recognizing South Ossetia as an independent country, and two of them were Pacific islands with populations of fewer than 15,000.
Catalan President Carles Puigdemont casts his vote for independence from Spain on Friday.
In both capitals, Mrs. May showed few signs of being of being a novice, despite having been in the job for just one week. She seemed relatively at ease both in the rather sober and businesslike forum with Ms. Merkel, and in the rowdy atmosphere of Parliament during the question session for the prime minister.
He said that the United States and Europe had crossed “a red line” on Ukraine by throwing support to the new government that quickly emerged after Mr. Yanukovych fled the capital following months of protests and two violent days of clashes that left scores dead.
Madrid asked the Constitutional Court to suspend Catalonia's referendum law, which had paved the way for the ballot. Spain's high court is now investigating whether the regional government has breached the constitution.
While Mr. Rajoy might have squandered previous opportunities to negotiate an end to the Catalan conflict, he is now at least giving a “measured response” to separatists who are willing to violate Spanish law, according to Luis Garicano, a leading member of Ciudadanos.
Puigdemont then led a group of Catalan lawmakers in signing what appeared to be a symbolic declaration of independence. The legal status of the document was unclear.
Puigdemont’s appearance in Brussels, flanked by five of his ousted regional ministers, marked a further twist in the month-long crisis triggered by the 1 October referendum.
