Chairman, House Committee
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, the Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
LAMAR SMITH
on Science, Space and Technology
The importance of the chirp recorded by LIGO (for Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory) cannot be overstated. It strongly bolsters Einstein’s theory of relativity and it potentially changes the shape of scientific inquiry into the next century, opening whole new fields of astronomical observation. It testifies to the ingenuity and perseverance of the physicists who designed the equipment, and it vindicates an investment of about $1.1 billion over 40 years by the National Science Foundation.
By coincidence, at about the same time that the LIGO discovery was announced, the House passed a bill requiring that National Science Foundation grants be justified “in the national interest.” It is doubtful that LIGO would have survived such political meddling. The bottom line is that whatever else it may be or lead to, the story of the chirp heard round the universe is simply cool. For proof, just listen to that little song.Briefly, after much trial and error and various earlier incarnations, scientists constructed two mammoth antennas, one in Washington State and the other in Louisiana, designed to detect evidence of the space-time gravitational waves predicted a century ago by Albert Einstein. And so they did, on Sept. 14, in the form of a simple chirp created by the waves that, as the Times science reporter Dennis Overbye put it, “seems destined to take its place among the great sound bites of science, ranking with Alexander Graham Bell’s “Mr. Watson — come here” and Sputnik’s first beeps from orbit.”
WashingtonThe director of the National Science Foundation has already implemented “national interest” guidelines for new grants. Contrary to your suggestion, the LIGO project would certainly fall under the legislation’s national interest definition to “promote the progress of science in the United States.”
This accomplishment, the product of decades of public investment, contrasts sharply with other projects funded by the foundation, like $700,000 to underwrite a climate change musical, $500,000 to create a video game for adults called “Prom Week,” or $275,000 to survey tourism in northern Norway.
