On Tuesday, US President Donald Trump weighed in on the debate, casting doubt on recent polling suggesting a "Yes" vote will win and saying that he is for "a united Spain."
Ask “independistas” why the need to break away from Spain is so urgent, and the answer goes back to 1714, when Philip V of Spain captured Barcelona during the War of the Spanish Succession, bringing an end to the Catalan principality. This was a period of consolidation across Europe, as strong monarchies absorbed smaller, weaker neighbors. In Catalonia, this is not obscure history: It is common, these days, to hear the archaic insult “botifler,” which means a supporter of Philip V and his ally, the French house of Bourbon.
But some analysts also note that Mr. Rajoy avoided raising the stakes the last time separatists held a ballot on independence, in November 2014: That vote was declared illegal, but neither Mr. Rajoy nor the police took physical measures to stop it.
“I think that in Russia, the majority of the society forgot about Ossetia, and if it weren’t for the Olympics, the majority of the society would also forget about Abkhazia,” Mr. Malashenko said. “Of course, Crimea is not Ossetia. But anyway, the popularity of Crimeans, and the Crimean tragedy, will be forgotten in a year.”
Madrid is "more than ready to talk," said Dastis, once the Catalan regional government stops "this charade of a referendum."
Police sent into the region by Madrid were widely criticized for an excessive use of force during the vote. In an attempt to shut it down, police fired rubber bullets and protesters and were seen pulling voters from polling stations by their hair and restraining elderly voters.
After the referendum, the struggle over Catalonia intensified in an often confusing exchange between the Catalan leader, Carles Puigdemont, and Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of Spain. After weeks of equivocating, Mr. Puigdemont told the Spanish authorities that Catalan lawmakers might vote for independence. That was not good enough for Mr. Rajoy, who announced on Saturday that he would remove Catalonia’s leadership.
We are not just facing an institutional dispute but also a social and political conflict that clearly has to be resolved by political means.
Trapero already faced charges of sedition over his force's actions in the run-up to Catalonia's banned referendum.
• Giles Tremlett reveals that in the Catalonia v Spain impasse: “At stake are five centuries of coexistence with the rest of Spain.” Indeed: not dissimilar to the centuries of coexistence between Ireland and England that inspired the Easter Rising of 1916.
