The Tokyo stock exchange joined the rout overnight after opening up slightly from its previous day. Traders in Japan knocked 7% off the value of shares in Tokyo, the biggest one-day fall since the Fukushima disaster in March 2011. In Hong Kong, shares in Britain’s biggest bank, HSBC, fell more than 5%.
What would Brexit mean for the NHS, social care and disabled people? | Denis Campbell, David Brindle and Patrick Butler Read more
The chancellor will spell out his concerns at an event where he will be joined by his predecessor, Alistair Darling. The Labour politician will say he is more worried now than he was during the 2008 financial crisis, arguing that a Brexit vote will result in not just one emergency budget but “one after another”.
The academic said that the trauma of past military interventions, and not sympathy for the government, drove people to oppose Friday night’s bloody coup attempt.
Sitting in the dealing room of the currency firm, Cook watched sterling slide after the Newcastle and Sunderland votes came in. He warned there could be a fall of “biblical” proportions if the vote is for Brexit.
As more results came in, Cook said the pound was suffering swings in volatility that exceeded the financial crisis.
Shortly after polling stations closed, Cook had warned of severe consequences if the result confounded recent polling. “On the other hand, the collapse of a leave win, something the market has almost fully discounted, could be truly biblical.” The later shifts in the pound early on Friday morning appeared to confirm those fears.
But those campaigning to stay in the bloc can count on much more sympathetic treatment from several other newspapers, including The Financial Times and The Guardian, and the left-leaning tabloid The Daily Mirror.
The Syrian government has summarily executed 5,000 to 13,000 people in mass hangings in just one of its many prisons since the start of the six-year-old uprising against Mr. Assad, Amnesty International said in a report in February.

