If the divisions across the country are widespread, those within the traditional political parties are even more intense.
"That said, you obviously wouldn't put too much into it, and although I usually advise investors to hold funds for the long term, with single country funds it's different. If you double your money in a year, cash in and go."
On Thursday, much of northern England went to vote in a similar mood. Immigration, actual or potential, mattered too. There may also have been Spitfire enthusiasts. But betrayal, grievance, dispossession: these were surely what counted for most. I feel sorrow that the British story should have such an unexpected end – murdered by the poor and neglected English who were already inside the keep.Coast guard boats took some family members clamoring for answers out to the site of the shipwreck early Thursday.
On the bridge, there were scenes of delirium. Demonstrators boarded an abandoned army truck, waving Turkish flags and chanting against the coup. Cars and mopeds drove past, tooting their horns in victory. “The English would never be able to do this, but we did,” one woman screamed at a pair of foreigners. “We’re Turkish.”
In fifty years reporting politics I have never encountered such shock and anger: the morning the result was announced my phone was red hot, mostly with younger friends convinced the older generation had, through indulging their prejudices, sold them down the river.
For all these reasons I believe the devaluation this time would be more like the one in 1967, when Harold Wilson famously declared that “the pound in your pocket has not been devalued”, but the British people disagreed with him, quickly noticing that the cost of imports and foreign holidays were rising sharply and that their true living standards were going down. Meanwhile financial speculators, back then called the Gnomes of Zurich, were making large profits at Britain’s expense.
The two Ural trucks, full of troops, arrived under cover of darkness and a pea-souper fog at the Ukrainian missile defence base outside Sevastopol late on Friday night, and rammed their way through the gates. Once inside, the Russian troops fanned out and screamed that they would shoot to kill if the Ukrainians did not surrender.
While Mr. Cameron failed to end the strife in his party, Mr. Bale and others said there was a good chance that his successor might.
Kyrgyzstan
