There are actually three main groups in Crimea: ethnic Ukrainians in the north, Russians in the south, and a third group called Tatars in the middle. The Tatars represent 15 to 20% of the population and suffered badly under Stalin in the Soviet era. They're "deadest against annexation by Russia," Alexander Motyl of Rutgers University told a Council on Foreign Relations audience last week.
Any talk about the importance of Crimea to Russia quickly turns to the Black Sea Fleet. The Russian Navy has had a base at the Crimean city of Sevastopol, on the Black Sea, for 230 years. Ships and subs based there are just north of Turkey and can reach the Mediterranean to influence the Middle East and the Balkans. 
Already, even as the government has arrested thousands of soldiers and officers who allegedly took part in the failed coup, there were signs that it was using the moment to widen a crackdown on perceived enemies. Alongside the military, the government also dismissed thousands of judges, who seemingly had no role to play in a military revolt.
Then, around 3:30 a.m., he landed in Istanbul, after a dangerous flight undertaken while the plotters still had fighter jets in the air — the surest sign that the revolt was failing.
Nigar Goksel, a senior Turkey analyst for the International Crisis Group, said there were two possible directions. “Either Erdogan utilizes this incident to redesign institutions in Ankara to his own benefit,” she said, “or he takes the opportunity with the solidarity that was extended to him by the opposition and different segments of society to reciprocate by investing more genuinely in rule of law and legitimate forms of dissent.”
Videos and photos posted on social media show crowds marching through the streets -- some marchers facing off against tanks and armored vehicles.
Turkish state broadcaster TRT says it has been taken over by members of the military who were part of the coup attempt.
Much, however, will depend on whether Erdoğan acts on his pledge to reinstate the death penalty in Turkey.It's another day of fast-moving events in Ukraine, and you're a little fuzzy on the details. So we're here to catch you up. Let's get started.
There would be no change for EU citizens already lawfully resident in the country, either. "These EU citizens will automatically be granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK and will be treated no less favorably than they are at present," it said.
