What is sarin and how does it work?
Scotland is one of four countries that make up the United Kingdom. England, Wales and Northern Ireland are the others. Scottish voters overwhelmingly backed remaining in the EU, 62% in favor of staying to 38% who want to leave.
Among the deadliest weapons deployed against civilians were Scud missiles, aimed at rebel-held areas in the early years of the war. Scores of people were killed in explosions and buried under rubble when their homes were hit.The Bank has also set up arrangements with other central banks around the world to provide foreign currency to the UK markets should that be required.
In a war that has involved some of the modern world’s most dangerous weapons, Mr. Assad and his allies have also used an ancient tactic to devastating effect: siege warfare.
In September, after the Assad government agreed to allow international aid convoys to enter Aleppo, Russian or Syrian warplanes attacked the trucks, killing about 20 people and leading to a suspension in aid.
Russia is Pepsi’s largest market outside the United States, contributing nearly $5 billion in annual revenue, about 7 percent of the company’s total. McDonald’s also has a sizable presence. The fast-food giant, which was the official restaurant of the recent Olympic Games in Sochi, has 413 Russian restaurants generating $2.5 billion a year, or around 9 percent of the company’s total revenue, according to an analysis by Deutsche Bank Securities.
Brace yourself for political and financial tumult like little we have ever witnessed. Expect Bank of England to step in
Mr. Trump’s stern words and lack of specifics attested to a leader, 75 days into his presidency, who is determined to show a more muscular style than Mr. Obama but is grappling with many of the same complexities that dogged his predecessor. And they raised anew a question that Mr. Trump until now has avoided: his criteria for using force, both in a humanitarian cause and in facing a direct, if distant, threat to the United States.
The West can call for a significant increase in Crimea's political autonomy within Ukraine, negotiated with Kiev. U.S. and European leaders should also speak out far more audibly in favor of minority language and cultural rights. They should have responded with outrage when the Rada, Ukraine's parliament, canceled the status of Russian as an official language and should now praise the promised veto of this law. 
