In a speech in Vienna, Lagarde warned of a worrying rise in economic nationalism that threatened the union and urged policymakers to do more to reduce the inequality that made some Europeans “feel left behind”.
David Cameron, along with the Treasury, the Bank of England, the International Monetary Fund and others have been attacked by the leave campaign for exaggerating the economic risks of Brexit. This criticism has been widely accepted by the British media and many financial analysts. As a result, British voters are now grossly underestimating the true costs of leaving.
A more immediate threat is the risk that the United Kingdom could break apart. Leaders of the Scottish National Party have said they would seek a new referendum on Scotland's independence if Britain votes to leave the EU.
Despite winning more than half of votes, public signs of jubilation for the Brexit camp were largely muted, although the delight was keenly felt by many.
"This morning the reality was actually sinking in," she told CNN affiliate ITN. "My family, this morning, even though the majority of us voted to leave, we actually regret it today."
Of those confirmed dead, one was a 27-year-old female crew member found dead in the water and another was a male student who died at a hospital. Rescuers later found at least two more students from the Ansan school who had died.
The maritime police said they were questioning the ship’s captain, Lee Jun-seok, 69, and other surviving crew members while arranging for cranes to be sent to the scene, in the Yellow Sea, to try to lift the vessel.
The students, in their second year of high school, were taking the trip as a break before their last year, when they must take difficult college entrance exams.
One of the students who made it out, Kim Tae-young, said he had seen people in the ferry’s cafeteria and in a game room on a level below him before the ship started listing.
During a brief news conference on Wednesday, Kim Young-bung, an executive at the Cheonghaejin Marine Company, which operated the ship, offered the company’s “deepest apology” but few details about what had happened.
