That such a young figure should emerge as the symbol of the protests is apt, if surprising: crowds have been overwhelmingly youthful – a reflection of the organisational work done by Scholarism and the Hong Kong Federation of Students over recent years, but also of a generational shift in identity.
Listening to Putin, one could easily forget that Russia is and for many centuries has been the largest country in the world and that it acquired its territories by imperialist expansion often accompanied by genocide and ethnic cleansing. 
But Beijing said in August that it would effectively screen candidates who want to run for city leader, a decision that has prompted weeks of street protests by pro-democracy activists who said it rendered the notion of democracy meaningless.
In an early morning video statement addressed to all Hong Kong residents, Hong Kong Chief Executive C.Y. Leung called for people to leave. He said police have exercised the greatest possible restraint in dealing with the protesters.
Victor Teo of the University of Hong Kong said Taiwan's leader is making progress as he negotiates the thin line between economic pragmatism and sovereignty. 
The main question burning in the minds of most Hong Kongers is how this will all end – and almost everyone involved can surmise a worst-case scenario. Hong Kong’s former security chief Regina Ip said on Monday that the city government fears a “mini-Tiananmen” – presumably that the protests would be violently dispersed, perhaps by the Chinese military. Nobody wants to see a repeat of 4 June 1989, when Beijing dispatched the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) to open fire on peaceful pro-democracy protesters. The PLA maintains a garrison in Hong Kong, but Leung said in a televised address on Monday morning that the Hong Kong government would not call in the troops. Chinese state media has also emphasised the central government’s confidence in Hong Kong authorities to deal with the protests themselves. That said, the protests continue to escalate, and Beijing seems ready to stand its ground, no matter what the cost.
The recent drumbeat of commentaries in the Chinese news media that have sought to shape the historical narrative may have inadvertently strengthened the resolve of many Hong Kong activists, who say such heavy-handed efforts remind them of the political and press freedoms they are fighting for, liberties absent in the rest of China.
So far the debate has focused on the system per se. But the chief executive's unique constitutional position within China also needs to be understood more clearly in order to fully appreciate the basis for the electoral process.
Britain should be doing more to help the governments of Hong Kong and China settle the situation, he said, calling on Hong Kong’s leaders to offer more concessions to the protesters to encourage them to back down.“I feel uncomfortable and even irritated when I hear this praise. When you were suffering pepper spray and teargas but decided to stay for the protest despite the repression from the government, I was not able to do anything other than stare at a meal box and the blank walls of the detention room and feel powerless.
