"The United States has not generated a coherent and forceful response to North Korea," Mount said. "If there's not a specific response that's tailored to this to deter this from happening in the future, it will continue to happen."
Protesters also regularly show up at American bases in Okinawa to object to the United States military presence. There are about 54,000 United States troops in Japan.
With the rising threats in the region, Mr. Abe has repeatedly called for a constitutional revision to allow Japan to expand its military capabilities. Japan is protected by its alliance with the United States, but Mr. Abe and his supporters believe the country needs to do more on its own.
Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson, who met on Wednesday in Moscow with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, said afterward that both sides had major differences and could not agree on basic facts concerning Syria and other major issues between the United States and Russia.
One of Shiroki's friends brought food to Ukrainian soldiers at a military base in Perevalnoe, near Simferopol, and told Shiroki he was stopped by soldiers about 20 times on the way. After answering many questions, he was able to deliver the food through a gate, but could not go inside. 
“The Japanese government is adding to the anxiety over North Korean missiles, and that creates an atmosphere in which Korea-bashing is acceptable. North Korea is seen as the enemy and so, by extension, are people in Japan with North Korean roots.”
The Pentagon said on Thursday that an airstrike by the American-led coalition in Syria had mistakenly killed 18 Syrian fighters allied with the United States.
“It is faux pacifism, and it always has been,” said Grant Newsham, a retired United States Marine colonel and a research fellow at the Japan Forum for Strategic Studies. “It is predicated on the perspective that Japan faces no threats.”
(CNN) With its fourth missile test in four days, North Korea issued a stark reminder to the United States that its weapons program isn't going away.
“A sense of crisis may be a little bit (of) a strong word, but there certainly exists a sense of uneasiness, widely shared by the Japanese industrialists,” he said. “But I think they are telling themselves that now is the time for them to see what is going to happen down the road, rather than jumping into a uneasy conclusion.”
