Its victims were a diverse bunch. The first was an ethnic Armenian; another Russian.
John Kerry: Brexit could be 'walked back' Read more
Brexiters seem to recognise that a sharp devaluation would be almost inevitable after Brexit, but argue that this would be healthy, despite the big losses of purchasing power for British households. In 1992 the devaluation actually proved very helpful to the British economy, and subsequently I was even praised for my role in helping to bring it about.
The oil-rich country in the South Caucasus has carefully played the United States and Russia off against each other, previously hosting a Russian radar base and American troops facilitating the transit of goods to Afghanistan. "It happened in South Caucasus and it's happening now in Ukraine, it's sort of the Soviet Union coming back," said Emin Milli, a journalist and activist in Baku. "This is what we feel in Azerbaijan, whether you're in government or civil society."
For voters who feel left behind by globalization and the rapid social changes that have come with it, a vote to leave the European Union can feel like a vote to restore Britain to its former greatness.
JUST WATCHED Brexit by the numbers Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Brexit by the numbers 02:12
It could hurt the economy
• Our hearts must go out to the people of Hong Kong. It’s a travesty of democracy when voters are required to choose between, in the words of pro-democracy campaigner Martin Lee, “a rotten orange, a rotten apple and a rotten banana” (Report, 1 October). We must do all we can to ensure the people of Hong Kong can have the kind of genuine political choices we enjoy in the – er, UK.
The messages, widely reported in South Korean media, painted a chaotic picture of the situation aboard the ferry as hundreds of passengers waited for help and some purportedly reached out to loved ones.
Outside, members of a local "self-defence" volunteer unit harassed journalists, and the deputy commander of the base briefly appeared to give comments. "We ignored their orders and eventually they left," he said, as one of the masked volunteers shone a light in his face and tried to stop him speaking. "I guess they will be back soon."
