Nearly 7.5 million people live in Catalonia, an economic powerhouse in the northeast of Spain. Spain's population is almost 49 million.
The United States and Europe are united in their support for Ukraine, including the need for economic assistance, and in their efforts to isolate Russia for its intervention in Crimea, Obama said, speaking at an European Union-U.S. summit in Brussels, Belgium.
But, in a familiar pattern, the banks dispensed credit too lavishly. In some countries, lending grew by 50 percent a year. Many of the loans were in foreign currencies. Such loans offered lower interest rates, but borrowers who were earning their pay in Hungarian forint or Ukrainian hryvnia had trouble paying their debts when their local currencies plunged in value.
The swirl of opinions, analyses and interests can be bewildering, especially in contrast to an essentially simple calculation by Russia. Unlike the West, it values geopolitical expansion, not economic conditions. Otherwise, Russia would invest the money it earns from oil and gas in economic development, and not in its military, which according to projected spending will account for well over a quarter of the national budget by 2015.
Asked which current world leader he most admired, Farage replied: "As an operator, but not as a human being, I would say Putin."
Emerging with Putin from two hours of talks and lunch in the 2,300-room palace, Macron said he wanted to strengthen cooperation with Russia in seeking a solution to the Syria conflict. He said this involved talking to all parties in a “diplomatic and political framework”.
Relations between France and Russia have been plagued by mistrust in the past few years, particularly over Syria and Ukraine. The two countries are in stark opposition over the Syrian civil war, with Moscow backing Assad and France supporting rebel groups trying to overthrow him.
French spies amassed and publicly released evidence last month that indicated the Assad regime had used toxic sarin gas on the town of Khan Sheikhun, an attack that provoked the US to launch missiles on a Syrian air base in its first targeted attack against the Syrian president’s forces.
Sixteen other Republicans voted against the Ukraine aid bill on Thursday, but most — if not all — did so on fiscal grounds. They included the most vocal members of the Tea Party wing and the usual so-called Dr. Nos of the House, like Justin Amash of Michigan and Thomas Massie of Kentucky.
Crimea belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine, which was then part of the Soviet Union. The region has a majority ethnic Russian population and other historic ties to Russia.
