“I think what happened in Syria is a disgrace to humanity, and he’s there, and I guess he’s running things, so I guess something should happen,” Trump said.While President George W. Bush looked into Mr. Putin’s soul, former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice spoke his language and President Obama sought a so-called reset of relations, they all found themselves discouraged that Mr. Putin, and Russia, did not behave the way they thought they should.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Along with Angela Eagle, the shadow business secretary, will on Monday issue a direct challenged to the leave campaign to be more specific about which rights they want to scrap. Writing in the Guardian, he said: “It’s time for you to come clean: which rights that the European Union today guarantees for British workers do you want to get rid of if we leave?”
The sanctions target employees of Syria’s Scientific Studies and Research Center, which the US claims partly enables the use of chemical weapons.Like nearly every aspect of the conflict, the vote planned by Crimea's regional parliament evokes widely differing interpretations of its legitimacy and importance.
Her family wants to find the man -- "even if we have to put up placards around neighborhood," she says.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Maj. Issam al-Reis, spokesman for the opposition Free Syrian Army's Southern Front, welcomed the US action and called for "the destruction of all tools of murder that Bashar al Assad's regime uses."
Read More