Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said: “While there may be some relief that the economy may have dodged an immediate sharp slowdown from the Brexit vote, the danger is still very much there given the major uncertainty that is apparent – and there seems a compelling case for the Bank of England to deliver a substantial package of measures at its August meeting to try and bolster business and consumer confidence”
There have not been any new trade deals. Liam Fox has taken up a position as secretary of state for international trade and president of the board of trade in order to develop new international trade. Iceland, India, Australia, New Zealand and Ghana are among the nations reported to have expressed interest in a deal. Mexico has gone as far as writing a new draft trade deal.
May also told European Council President Donald Tusk on Tuesday that Britain would not take up its scheduled presidency of the council in 2017. The presidency of the European Council is rotated between member states.
Officials will need time to consult with the governments of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, as well as with various industry sectors, to work out the UK's objectives for the negotiations, according to a statement from 10 Downing Street.
Services and manufacturing sectors have both suffered a big hit, reporting that output and new orders have fallen this month.

The price of cocoa traded in London rose to its highest in almost 40 years on Wednesday in reaction to the pound’s fall. Analysts said the 1.5% jump to £2,495 a tonne, which has eased slightly since, was purely driven by currency movements.
Bilateral relationships and trade between them would continue after Britain's departure from the European Union, she said.
The trips to Paris and Berlin were intended to build May's relationships with key European leaders ahead of the critical Brexit negotiations.
She said that she understood that the delayed triggering of the article "will not please everyone."
