She took another shot at Corbyn's shaky leadership after he attempted to raise the issue of workers' rights.
There has not been a penny of new funding announced for the NHS after the referendum vote. With the actual day of Brexit still possibly years away, it will be some time before any possible benefits are passed on to the NHS.
Despite some expectations of a cut, and the former chancellor George Osborne’s claim that a vote for Brexit would drive up mortgage rates, interest rates have been kept at at 0.5%, where they have been since May 2009.
“There had been little evidence of any impact on consumer spending on services and non-durable goods, although there were some reports of consumers becoming more hesitant around purchases of higher-value goods.”
“The outlook for investment was uncertain,” the report said. “The majority of firms spoken with did not expect a near-term impact from the referendum result on their capital spending. But around one third expected some negative effects over the next twelve months, with reports of a ‘risk off’ approach to expenditures and some imminent plans for spending slipping.”
Bilateral relationships and trade between them would continue after Britain's departure from the European Union, she said.
"I want to work with Chancellor Merkel and my colleagues around the European Council in a constructive spirit to make this a sensible and orderly departure," she said.
She said the business of negotiating Britain's exit from the bloc would take time and "require serious and detailed work."
Speaking after Merkel, May said that both sides wanted to maintain "the closest possible economic relations between our two countries, and I believe that is what German and British business want too."
But Merkel said that while the general issue of the impending Brexit would be broached, neither formal nor informal negotiations on the subject could begin until Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty -- which officially kicks off the exit process and opens a two-year window for exit negotiations -- was triggered.
