Built of wooden squares, the 10-foot tall statue of a man holding aloft a yellow umbrella has now taken its place alongside the posters, cartoons, banners and calligraphy that now decorate the streets and sidewalks of Hong Kong's Admiralty district.
Instead, Putin primarily explains why Crimea matters to Russia: "The graves of Russian soldiers whose bravery brought Crimea into the Russian empire are also in Crimea. This is also Sevastopol -- a legendary city with an outstanding history, a fortress that serves as the birthplace of Russia's Black Sea Fleet ... symbolizing Russian military glory and outstanding valor."
Territory’s last British governor says Beijing is being allowed to ‘spit in the face’ of handover pact because of trade fears
In an early morning video statement addressed to all Hong Kong residents, Hong Kong Chief Executive C.Y. Leung called for people to leave. He said police have exercised the greatest possible restraint in dealing with the protesters.
The main question burning in the minds of most Hong Kongers is how this will all end – and almost everyone involved can surmise a worst-case scenario. Hong Kong’s former security chief Regina Ip said on Monday that the city government fears a “mini-Tiananmen” – presumably that the protests would be violently dispersed, perhaps by the Chinese military. Nobody wants to see a repeat of 4 June 1989, when Beijing dispatched the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) to open fire on peaceful pro-democracy protesters. The PLA maintains a garrison in Hong Kong, but Leung said in a televised address on Monday morning that the Hong Kong government would not call in the troops. Chinese state media has also emphasised the central government’s confidence in Hong Kong authorities to deal with the protests themselves. That said, the protests continue to escalate, and Beijing seems ready to stand its ground, no matter what the cost.
That such a young figure should emerge as the symbol of the protests is apt, if surprising: crowds have been overwhelmingly youthful – a reflection of the organisational work done by Scholarism and the Hong Kong Federation of Students over recent years, but also of a generational shift in identity.
So far the debate has focused on the system per se. But the chief executive's unique constitutional position within China also needs to be understood more clearly in order to fully appreciate the basis for the electoral process.
“I feel uncomfortable and even irritated when I hear this praise. When you were suffering pepper spray and teargas but decided to stay for the protest despite the repression from the government, I was not able to do anything other than stare at a meal box and the blank walls of the detention room and feel powerless.
“Looking back at history, it seems like the Communist Party made promises it never intended to keep, which is why people are so angry,” said Ho-Fung Hung, a sociologist at Johns Hopkins University who grew up in Hong Kong during the 1980s and ’90s.
For those across the border in the mainland, the perception of Hong Kongers ranges from admiration to a feeling of contempt: Following the media storm that followed the MTR noodle-eating incident, a prominent Chinese academic, Peking University professor Kong Qingdong, called Hong Kongers "bastards" and imperialist "running dogs." 
