But such burgeoning innovators, held back by dysfunctional governance in their country, have not been able to enjoy the kind of success that WhatsApp is realizing today. 
As the crowd swelled in the evening, Joshua Wong, 17, a leader of a youth protest group, Scholarism, who recently graduated from high school, said the protesters seemed to be getting younger.
I try to attend Sunday’s meetings and was there yesterday. And I participate in the events commemorating those who died. Now my friends and I fundraise for medical equipment. Many foreign friends have been asking how they can help, so I am spreading the news. It might sound strange and ridiculous, but I also try to fight the mentality of some people, even my parents, who seem to be enormously lost with their old and new principles.
Russian Defense Minister Sergey Shoigu has said the exercises are being conducted to check "combat readiness."
Pressure was mounting on Russia as leaders from the EU and the UK joined an international outcry, with EU High Representative Catherine Ashton deploring Russia's "unwarranted escalation of tensions."
Airspace in the region reopened Saturday, a day after Ukraine accused Russian Black Sea forces of trying to seize two airports in Crimea but said Ukrainian security forces had prevented them from taking control.
Have you been surprised by the changing events?
U.S. officials earlier told CNN that the Russian military exercises were making U.S. military and intelligence agencies concerned that Russia may be positioning ground forces to be able to move across the border into Ukraine if Moscow issued such orders. 
Obama said any violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity would be "deeply destabilizing, and he warned "the United States will stand with the international community in affirming that there will be costs for any military intervention in Ukraine."
Shaw said the Bank was likely to supplement a rate cut with other measures, including an expansion of the funding for lending scheme that supports bank and building society mortgage lending.