And even if this can be overcome, in the end Poland and Ukraine, rather than finding mutual love for each other, might well start a war over historical memory, for which neither lacks pretexts. We have seen the history books reopened on Crimea; there is no reason they cannot be reopened on Polish-Ukrainian tensions as well.
The denunciations of critics of the Ukraine policy have further unnerved opposition figures. Their unease was compounded amid a rush of recent moves to silence dissenting voices — virtually shuttering the main independent television station, removing a news editor deemed insufficiently loyal, shutting opposition websites and continuing to brand nongovernmental organizations receiving money from abroad as “foreign agents.”
When the Parliament took another symbolic vote, demanding that Western nations imposing sanctions on Russia include all Duma members, the deputies around him also complained about his choice, he said.
An EU-Russia summit has been canceled, and the G7 group of leading industrialized countries has excluded Russia from what was the G8. The G7 will meet in June in Brussels, instead of attending a planned G8 summit in the Russian city of Sochi.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Similarly, Raiffeisen’s loans to Russia total €10.2 billion, compared with €13.5 billion for the French bank Société Générale, which is a much larger institution, according to data compiled by Morgan Stanley.
Mr. Rohrabacher has found a kindred spirit on the fringe of the Democratic Party: Representative Alan Grayson of Florida, whom conservatives love to loathe. He complained bitterly as the House Foreign Affairs Committee drafted its Russia sanctions bill on Tuesday.
Not only is there a lot to lose, but there is also more to gain than ever in our modern history. If Ukraine survives in its current shape (even without Crimea) and enters a path similar to that followed by Poland, the human and economic potential of both countries, strengthened by ad hoc alliances within the European Union, will allow the realization of Poland’s historical dream to balance Russia’s role in the region and ensure a significant position for Eastern Europe within the West.
In an interview Tuesday with PBS, acting Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said Ukraine is struggling to maintain a fighting capability after it was "deliberately dismantled" under Yanukovych. He said his government ceded Crimea without a shot to demonstrate to the world that Russia was the aggressor, he said. But if Moscow moves against another portion of Ukraine, "We will fight."
In addition to providing money to Ukraine, the bills would formalize sanctions authorized recently by Mr. Obama and expand the list of individuals and entities targeted for sanctions.
