Today, the leaders of this democratic project stand accused of rebellion and face the severest punishment possible under the Spanish penal code – the same as for cases of terrorism or murder: 30 years in prison. The vice-president and seven Catalan government ministers have been in prison since last Thursday, as well as two Catalan civic leaders, while orders for the rest of the Catalan government to be detained have been issued. This is a colossal outrage that will have serious consequences.
On Thursday, the supreme court ruled to release on bail the Catalan parliament’s speaker Carme Forcadell and four other lawmakers, who enabled the declaration of independence by overseeing a parliamentary vote. Another lawmaker was released without bail.
Mr. Rajoy’s government took charge of Catalonia on Oct. 27, using emergency powers under Article 155 of the Spanish Constitution, shortly after separatist lawmakers voted for independence from Spain. He fired the Catalan government, dissolved the Catalan Parliament and set new regional elections for Dec. 21.

Spain’s prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, claimed on Monday that half of the Twitter accounts that amplified the issue of Catalan independence were registered in Russia and 30% in Venezuela.
“We need to understand how widespread it is and what the impact is on the democratic process.”
A spokesperson for Twitter said the company “recognises that the integrity of the election process itself is integral to the health of a democracy. As such, we will continue to support formal investigations by government authorities into election interference as required.”
A total of 24 people surrendered for “taking part in an unauthorised assembly”, the Hong Kong government said in a statement. “Police will conduct follow-up investigations based on the information provided,” it said.
MADRID — In his first visit to Catalonia since taking control of the restive region in Spain, Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy on Sunday urged Catalans to vote in next month’s elections to defeat the independence movement and return the region to “normality.”
Mr. Rajoy, addressing Catalan supporters of his conservative Popular Party, rejected criticism of the jailing of separatist politicians, a day after hundreds of thousands of pro-independence demonstrators marched in Barcelona, the Catalan capital, to demand their release.
