When relevant results appeared on the Chinese search engines, the articles contained a distinctively pro-China slant and even surfaced a month-old article about a small pro-Beijing counter-protest in Hong Kong. 
Meanwhile, police have staged a dramatic withdrawal. leaving protests largely undisturbed. As a result, the civil disobedience movement has turned into what feels like a self-governed street utopia.
The spark of the Umbrella Revolution is political: Demonstrators want Beijing to grant Hong Kongers a free and direct election of the chief executive in 2017. But the passions that have driven people into the streets are rooted in the desire to preserve a distinct identity from China — in areas like rule of law, freedom of speech and of the press, financial infrastructure, anticorruption institutions, education, Cantonese language and Western influence.
Shaken and outraged by the police's use of force Sunday, tens -- if not hundreds of thousands of Hong Kongers have organized a movement that has stunned even activist leaders with its sophistication and size.
Certainly Hong Kong's unique history has set it apart. While the former colony was returned to Chinese sovereignty, the British colonial legacy has endured, and with it a set of institutions and historical, cultural, economic, legal and lifestyle differences. 
Content that was more sympathetic to Hong Kong protesters had been removed with messages reading: "In accordance with relevant laws, regulations and policies, search results could not be displayed."
Compared with China throughout much of the city's modern history, Hong Kong has been a bastion of peace, prosperity and, in the 1960s and 70s, a haven from the horrors of the Cultural Revolution. The city has welcomed refugees from across China, notably Shanghai, since the civil war and the rise of the Communist party in 1949.  
The protest movement developed into a much larger, more inclusive display of defiance as the Occupy Central movement joined the students' rally early Sunday. 
The Chinese central government said that it is "confident" that the Hong Kong government can handle the movement lawfully, according to a report in Chinese state media. The Chinese government opposes all illegal activities that "could undermine rule of law and jeopardize 'social tranquility,'" the report says.<U+200B>
 He reaffirmed that the government in Hong Kong will uphold Beijing's decision.
