It’s perfectly possible, of course, that the Tories on both sides who suspect Johnson was never an outer in his bones are plain wrong, that the anonymous Labour MP who hotly accused him on Friday of jeopardising thousands of ordinary people’s jobs just to secure one for himself was doing him a terrible injustice.
"[We're] at one of those moments, my historian's nose tells me, [that] if this result stays and Britain does leave the union we're entering a very dark and exceptionally dangerous period in European and world history too."
Chemical weapons have helped Assad hold on to power during a long and brutal civil war, at the cost of immense civilian suffering. The fact that he has faced no real consequences for their use risks setting a dangerous precedent, with implications that carry far beyond Syria, weapons expert Guthrie said.
One group of Tory remainers watching the speech on TV jeered out loud when a rather pale Johnson said leaving Europe needn’t mean pulling up the drawbridge; that this epic victory for Nigel Farage could somehow “take the wind out of the sails” of anyone playing politics with immigration. Too late for all that now, one said.
“British football clubs may find themselves only able to sign foreign players over the age of 18 as, outside the EU/EEA, they would no longer be able to benefit from the exception under the current Fifa regulations given for transfers involving 16 and 17 year old footballers within the EU/EEA,” said Shapiro.
The Shard is London, a symbol of a city where oligarchs are celebrated and migrants are exploited but that pretends to be a multicultural utopia. Here, in their capital city, the English are no longer calling the shots. They are hirelings.Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Related: Markets around the world are freaking out
“In the coming weeks, the Bank will assess economic conditions and will consider any additional policy responses”, he said in a statement.
“The conundrum,” said Robert S. Litwak, the director of studies at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, “is that North Korea never acts except under pressure, but pressure never works.”