Gravitational waves: breakthrough discovery after a century of expectation Read more
Gravitational waves: 'we can hear the universe' – live Read more
At the beginning of the signal, their calculations told them how stars perish: the two objects had begun by circling each other 30 times a second. By the end of the 20 millisecond snatch of data, the two had accelerated to 250 times a second before the final collision and a dark, violent merger.
These are Rainer Weiss of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Kip Thorne and Ronald Drever of the California Institute of Technology, the three founders of Ligo, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory in the US.
“The colliding black holes that produced these gravitational waves created a violent storm in the fabric of space and time, a storm in which time speeded up and slowed down, and speeded up again, a storm in which the shape of space was bent in this way and that way,” he said.
Even with such extreme sensitivity, only the most massive and violent events out there would be loud enough to make the detectors ring. LIGO was designed to catch collisions of neutron stars, which can produce the violent flashes known as gamma ray bursts.
I’d like to draw an analogy with my own research at CERN’s Large Hadron Collider. Before it was discovered in 2012, the Higgs boson was expected by the majority of particle physicists. Many theorists (including Peter Higgs) would have been astonished if it didn’t show up. But when it did, it still had a huge impact, both emotionally and scientifically. Knowing is different from guessing, measuring is different from predicting. In the case of the Higgs, we are now exploring the higher-energy reaches of inner space armed with an understanding of the origins of mass. In the case of gravitational waves, we can now begin to observe the universe in an entirely new way, and it is difficult to predict what we may learn from that.
Gravitational waves: everything you need to know Read more
Prof B S Sathyaprakash, from Cardiff University’s school of physics and astronomy, said: “The shock would have released more energy than the light from all the stars in the universe for that brief instant. The fusion of two black holes which created this event had been predicted but never observed.”
Thus coddled, the lasers in the present incarnation, known as Advanced LIGO, can detect changes in the length of one of those arms as small as one ten-thousandth the diameter of a proton — a subatomic particle too small to be seen by even the most powerful microscopes — as a gravitational wave sweeps through.
