The latest wave of protests came after Beijing in August rejected demands for people to freely choose the city's next leader in 2017. 
Photos of police confronting young pro-democracy protesters are sensitive in China, because it's a reminder of Tiananamen Square, in which Chinese authorities cracked down on student protesters on June 4, 1989, Fu said. 
"Even though I cannot do work ... it is better for me to give my time for them, to help them to improve their situation in Hong Kong," he said.
Beijing, in a policy document released in June, said that Hong Kong does not enjoy "full autonomy" and residents are "confused or lopsided in their understanding" of "One Country, Two Systems."
But he wasn't safe in Iran either, for reasons he won't disclose for fear of putting his family in danger. "The government wanted me dead," he said. If he returns, he believes he will be incarcerated, tortured, or worse.
"The Refugee Union completely changed the asylum arena by coordinating individual protests into group action," says Cosmo Beatson, executive director of Vision First, an NGO that is giving the group advice and logistical support.
The revolution I am referring to is that of the silent majority, the nondescript middle-aged and conservatives who prefer change in an orderly fashion -- the segment usually ignored by the media and the "haves" of the society as "aging and not sexy."
The differences between the two provide a wealth of reasons why they are often at loggerheads -- and no more so than now, with tens of thousands of Hong Kongers taking to the streets to protest what they see as Beijing's undue encroachment into Hong Kong's civil affairs and political structure. 
It's a feeling that Rahman, 30, knows well. When he arrived in Hong Kong in 2007, he, too, was homeless and slept on the streets for months.
The new framework will allow Hong Kong's 5 million registered voters to select their leader, although candidates must be approved by a committee similar to the one that selected the city's top official in 2012.
