There are some who fear that clampdowns on civil liberties might mean the city could soon face another exodus: "I'm worried that people might migrate again," Michael Davis, a law professor at Hong Kong University, told CNN's Andrew Stevens.. "That would be a disaster."
Every six months since the handover in 1997, Hong Kong University has surveyed a sample of Hong Kong residents to gauge feelings of identity in the city. The last poll was conducted in June, when over 40% of those questioned said they identified as a "Hong Konger," rather than "Chinese" (amongst other options), a percentage that has crept up in the past 17 years. 
The discovery marks the second time that the demonstrators’ phones appear to have been targeted since the protests began last week.
After Mao Zedong and his comrades took over China in 1949, many Hong Kong residents felt anxious about the new Communist power but also developed a sense of superiority to their mainland counterparts, looking down on ordinary Chinese as bumpkins struggling under economic and political deprivations.
But now they are being shunned by fans and companies in mainland China, on whose support many of their careers depend. Arms of China’s state-run news media have denounced them as disloyal to their country. Photographs of a list containing the names of Mr. Wong, Ms. Ho and other artists were circulated on social media this week. The list was said to be a blacklist of so-called pro-Occupy artists that had been drawn up and sent to mainland news media outlets and entertainment companies, with instructions not to mention or promote the stars.
When protests first erupted at the weekend, authorities initially took a tougher line - using riot gear, pepper spray and most controversially, tear gas to try and clear the demonstrators. 
Hong Kong protesters passionate but gullible, says China's 1997 handover negotiator
The sky may well be the limit, given the recent signals of the Chinese leadership. Last month, President Xi Jinping hosted a meeting in Beijing with dozens of Hong Kong’s elite to emphasize the government’s opposition to calls for political reform.
The rest of China has benefited greatly from Hong Kong's "investment, energy and entrepreneurship," Hong Kong University's Michael Davis, says. 
"I just met those guys, but I know them better now. We have different ideas, but we're finding a way to accept each other," he says. "Democracy isn't just about voting for our next leader. It's about seeing the equality of others.
