Although regional institutions were suspended from 1938 to 1977, Catalan bourgeois elites have displayed remarkable survival instincts, entering into alliances with the forces of the Spanish right whenever they deemed it necessary to maintain order. Catalan conservative nationalists have ruled the region for more than three decades in the democratic period. These same nationalists have voted in favour of about half of the national budgets during this period. If changes are to be made in Spain’s federal structure, they shouldn’t be based upon the false assumption that Catalonia has had no role in national politics.
Please note that there may be a delay between the time when the video is available and when the transcript is published.
Another source of unrest is the sheer press of numbers on our limited space.
People at a concert in support of jailed leaders hold banners reading "Freedom for the Political Prisoners."
The proposed visit was part of an inquiry into Hong Kong’s relations with the UK 30 years after the joint declaration that led to the handover to China in 1997, under which the territory has the right to a degree of autonomy.
In the last few years, secessionists have attempted to give a sheen of democratic legitimacy to an essentially ethno-linguistic movement, conveniently sidestepping concerns over the rule of law. “This is all about democracy”, they said. Nothing was said, though, about the fundamental nature of the vote, which was nothing other than an attempt to deprive non-secessionist Catalans, the majority, of their citizenship rights. Arnaldo Otegi, a former member of Eta, turned activist for the Catalan nationalist cause, said on Twitter: “Democracy consists in respecting what people say. Laws come after.”
6. Andromeda, Whirlpool and Sombrero are all examples of what astronomic feature?
Q&A Why does the Spanish government say the Catalan referendum is illegal? Show Hide The Spanish government argues that any referendum on Catalan independence would be illegal because the country’s 1978 constitution makes no provision for a vote on self-determination. The Spanish constitutional court, which has suspended the referendum law pushed through the Catalan parliament in September, is looking into whether the law breaches the constitution. In March this year, the former Catalan president Artur Mas was banned from holding public office for two years after being found guilty of disobeying the constitutional court by holding a symbolic independence referendum three years ago.
By late morning, the alarm in the camp had subsided, and many of the hundreds of protesters still there slept after an exhausting night. Some grumbled about the lack of direction on what to do next.
The UK and China have been seeking to repair ties, which have been strained since Cameron met the Dalai Lama, Tibet’s spiritual leader, in 2012. The British government is also conducting an urgent inquiry into the use of UK-made teargas by the Hong Kong police in light of renewed and violent clashes in the former UK colony. British teargas was used by Hong Kong police against demonstrators on 28 September, ministers have confirmed.
