The acting prime minister has gone so far as to say that a Russian invasion would mean war and an end to his country's relationship with Russia. 
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, a regional security bloc, sent in 10 monitors Monday, and Kerry called for a larger mission.
At rallies last month, the Crimean Tatars were chanting both "Allahu Akbar" in Arabic and "Glory to Ukraine" in Ukrainian. At the time, there was an outside chance of a Crimean regional government supported by the Crimean Tatars, some Ukrainians and local elites who resented the rule of Viktor Yanukovych's clique., which is why Russia then intervened to put its supporters in power instead.
The base's aviation brigade then sang the Ukrainian national anthem, lowered the Ukrainian flag and left the base, he said.
Yanukovich then left the capital and security forces withdrew from key protest areas --  setting in motion the changes that unfolded over the weekend.
Amid the chaos on the streets, foreign diplomats stepped up efforts to find an agreement between Yanukovych and the opposition to end the fighting.
NATO has already stepped up air policing over the Baltic states -- all members of the Alliance.
Those words will have echoed across parts of the former Soviet Union with large Russian populations: Moldova (10%), Lithuania (6%), Latvia (27%) and Estonia (25%). Will the Russian region of Transnistria in Moldova begin agitating for its own referendum? Will oblasts (regions) of eastern Ukraine demand their own vote?
Transnistria is already beyond the control of the Moldovan government. Just as a statue of Lenin overlooks the main square in the Crimean capital, Simferopol, so another stands outside Transnistria's regional assembly in Tiraspol. In a 2006 referendum more than 95% of voters said they wanted to be reunited with Russia. 
But that line has only hastened the signing of Ukraine's association agreement with the European Union. In signing the agreement Friday, the President of the European Council, Herman van Rompuy, pointedly said it was a response to "the popular yearning for a decent life as a nation, for a European way of life." The subtext was that Putin's Russia was on the wrong side of history -- anti-democratic, corrupt, without values.
