The British referendum on June 23 plunged the European Union into crisis. It left Britain rudderless as the pound sank in value and both the governing and opposition parties engaged in fierce and acrimonious leadership battles. Mr. Cameron, who had supported remaining in the European Union, said after the referendum that he would resign once the governing Conservatives selected a new leader, a process that he had expected to last until September but that was drastically accelerated on Monday.
Growth between April and June was stronger than the 0.4% achieved in the first quarter, boosted by the best performance from the industrial sector in almost 17 years according to the Office for National Statistics.
Six in 10 respondents, or 60%, expected the general economic situation to worsen in the next 12 months, up from 46% in June. Only 20% of consumers expected it to improve, down from 27% in June. The proportion of people who believed prices would increase rapidly in the next 12 months jumped 20 percentage points from 13% to 33%.
Forecast group EY Item Club says business investment and consumer spending will be held back because of uncertainty
Looking ahead over the next three months, 26% more Rics members expected sales to drop further than expected a busier housing market. “This is the most negative reading for near-term expectations since 1998,” Rics said.
Boris Johnson, tipped to replace Cameron until he also ducked out of the race last month, was one of the high-profile members of parliament who backed fellow Leave campaigner Leadsom.
Photos of a racially abusive message, in Polish and English, distributed in Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire, on Friday June 24.
• Lawmakers began whittling down the candidates on Tuesday in the first of a series of votes. Liam Fox received the fewest and was eliminated, and later Stephen Crabb also exited the race. Ms. May received the most votes, with 165, and Andrea Leadsom, a minister for energy and climate change, came in second with 66 votes. Michael Gove, the justice secretary, was third with 48.

The number of homes changing hands is expected to slump this summer in the wake of the UK’s vote to leave the EU, with estate agents and surveyors more pessimistic about the housing market than at any point since the late 1990s.
