In 2014, however, Catalonia’s vote was nonbinding, and Mr. Rajoy held a parliamentary majority, which meant his political survival was not on the line.
The decision was complicated further on Monday by a stark warning from a spokesman for the governing party of Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of Spain that Carles Puigdemont, the leader of Catalonia, could be charged with insurrection if he declared independence. The spokesman, Pablo Casado, even drew an analogy with the fate of Lluís Companys, a Catalan leader who was imprisoned for proclaiming a Catalan state in 1934, shortly before Spain’s civil war.
A large number of Ukrainian soldiers have defected or deserted but there are some who say they will fight rather than leave their posts. However, the situation in Sevastopol on Wednesday was further confirmation that few soldiers have any desire to engage in a firefight with the Russians.
Analysts say Mr. Rajoy had no choice but to toughen his stance. “Whether it’s Rajoy or someone else in charge, nobody can allow separatists to dynamite the rule of law,” said César Díaz-Carrera, a politics professor at the Complutense university in Madrid.
During the last regional elections, only 39% voted for explicitly unionist parties, 47% voted for pro-independence parties, while 13% voted for parties who were equivocal on independence. It is correct that the official turnout in the referendum of 1 October was below 50%, but that fails to take into account the closure of polling stations and confiscation of votes by the police. In fact, the number of votes in favour that were counted would have been enough to secure a majority at the record-high turnout level of the last regional election. On 8 October, hundreds of thousands of people protested in Barcelona against independence. A show of strength, yes, but no majority, and somewhat undercut by the fact that some of the attendants had come from outside Catalonia.
Video
The aftermath of recognition, however, has presented Russia with a long series of headaches. This week, economists have warned repeatedly that Crimea, if it is absorbed, will prove a serious drag on Russia’s budget, but their arguments have been drowned out in the roar of public support for annexation.
Protesters in white rally in Barcelona and Madrid, but anti-separatists also march
As Crimea hurtled toward accession this week, South Ossetia’s isolation deepened. Villagers in Atotsi, in Georgian-controlled territory, watched men in unmarked military uniforms build a five-foot-high barbed-wire fence across a stretch of pasture, part of a 30-mile barrier that officials say will eventually surround the entire enclave. A poster read, “The state border of the Republic of South Ossetia.”
Even as others criticized the vote as a fraud, Mr. Putin moved quickly on Monday to recognize its result, which he called “more than convincing” with nearly 97 percent of voters in favor of seceding from Ukraine. By Tuesday he signed a treaty of accession with the region’s new leaders to make Crimea and the city of Sevastopol the 84th and 85th regions of the Russian Federation.
