The embassy said: “We are shocked and deeply concerned by the recent incidents of xenophobic abuse directed at the Polish community and other UK residents of migrant heritage. The Polish embassy is in contact with relevant institutions, and local police are investigating the two most widely reported cases, in Hammersmith, London, and Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire.
Additional reporting by Philip Oltermann in Berlin, Gordon Darroch in the Hague, David Crouch in Gothenburg, Helena Smith in Athens and Rosie Scammell in RomeFurther, the vote in Britain was a referendum on a European entity that was easy to rally against, while the presidential vote here is increasingly becoming a referendum on a polarizing individual.
You can check with your local authority’s electoral services team if you are worried that you may not be on the register.
“The situation will likely be fluid but flexibility has always been foundational to the way this war has been and will be fought. Getting after Daesh will continue to occur.”
The Polish embassy in the UK said it was shocked at incidents of xenophobic abuse directed at members of its community in the past few days, and the Board of Deputies of British Jews said it was alarmed by reports of harassment and abuse.
But perhaps no one is more admired in Ukraine's east than the country's number one oligarch, Rinat Akhmetov. Worth an estimated $15.4bn, according to Forbes, Akhmetov has not become politically involved, although he has entered the debate about the country's future. He is the owner of one of Ukraine's top two football clubs, Shakhtar Donetsk, and the biggest player in the Donbas region mining industry. In 2011 he paid a whopping £136.4m for a penthouse at One Hyde Park in London.
“Victory for Freedom! As I have been asking for years, we must now have the same referendum in France and EU countries,” Le Pen wrote on Twitter.
On the Bosphorus Bridge, there was nothing as visibly violent. But many of those who stayed overnight had bloodlust for those who tried to drag Turkey back into its coup-splattered past; the army ousted four different civilian governments between 1960 and 1997, an era that many hoped had ended.
That argument riles backers of the “leave” lobby, who argue that European citizens distort the labor market in part because they are able to come into Britain with virtually no checks and start looking for a job.
