In Hong Kong, anger with the Chinese government runs especially deep among people in their 30s and younger. This week, thousands of university students boycotted classes and attended assemblies to voice their complaints, and on Friday hundreds of high school students also abandoned classes for a day of protest near the government and legislative headquarters.
On Wednesday morning, Spain’s interior ministry announced it was cancelling leave for all the Guardia Civil and national police officers tasked with preventing the referendum. In a statement, it said the affected officers would have to be available between 20 September and 5 October, but added the period could be extended if necessary.
The Hong Kong Federation of Students said the protesters took the action after Hong Kong’s government leader, Leung Chun-ying, refused to meet them.
Deep within the animal shelter construction site, the cemetery isn’t accessible to the public. But some of those at the existing makeshift dog shelter next door were furious to hear the newly announced cemetery had already been constructed in their area.
Poland's Sikorski, meanwhile, urged Ukrainian leaders to keep dialogue open with Moscow.
But the chant was soon replaced by a new cry: “Occupation forces out!”
Now that Russia has declared not only virtual war on Ukraine, but also real war, now that the first conscripts have been mobilized by Kiev, we all realize that still worse lies in store for us.
The result can be decisions that put the leader's own position at risk. Gen. Augusto Pinochet, after ruling Chile for 15 years, came to believe he was extremely popular. To his dismay, a plebiscite he called in 1988 revealed that most Chileans would rather have a different leader. Other authoritarian leaders, such as Daniel Ortega of Nicaragua, have lost power after calling elections that they were sure they would win. 
They forget that the media they have censored tells them only what they want to hear, and that the "experts" they have cultivated are those that reinforce their own prejudices. They start to believe the verdicts of the courts they have politicized. 
Ed Royce, who chairs the committee, and was an the architect of the Iran sanctions push that infuriated the Obama administration, told CNN: “The question is will the White House support something as aggressive as the economic sanctions that we would like to see pushed.”
