In a dramatic announcement two days before the final vote, Macron’s team said thousands of its campaign emails had been released in a major hacking operation. Cybersecurity analysts suggested the operation might have been undertaken by Russia-affiliated groups. Moscow and Russian news outlets had rejected any allegations of interference.
Farage strongly opposed any British military involvement in Syria at the time of the parliamentary vote last summer.
And even if this can be overcome, in the end Poland and Ukraine, rather than finding mutual love for each other, might well start a war over historical memory, for which neither lacks pretexts. We have seen the history books reopened on Crimea; there is no reason they cannot be reopened on Polish-Ukrainian tensions as well.
The Russian has drawn international condemnation over his support for Syria's Bashar al-Assad and annexation of the Crimean region of Ukraine.
Mr. Putin’s willingness to negotiate suggested some confidence that he will be dealing with the West from a position of strength, having consolidated his grip on Crimea and largely dispersed the remaining Ukrainian military units that had been holed up awaiting instructions from Kiev. The Ukrainian government this week formally ordered a withdrawal.
Farage insisted he did not support Putin but accused the EU of "feeding an entirely unrealistic dream of a future as an EU member state" to Kiev. He added: "This has encouraged brave young men and women in western Ukraine to rebel to the point of toppling a legitimate president and led to the utterly predictable debacle whereby Vladimir Putin has annexed part of the country and now casts a long shadow over hopes of genuine democracy in the rest of it...If you poke the Russian bear with a stick he will respond. And if you have neither the means nor the political will to face him down that is very obviously not a good idea."
The Kremlin said a new blockade would “significantly complicate the living conditions for the region’s residents, impeding their movement and normal trade and economic activities,” and it urged negotiations to address the situation.
In contrast, federalists, centered in the employment rolls of the expansive European institutions, dream of a United States of Europe and fantasize about returning to the 1990s, before the euro, before eastward expansion, when the European Union was smaller, smarter, more prosperous and decidedly Western — and hardly anyone challenged the vision of an “ever closer Union.”
Asked by journalists about alleged Russian efforts to influence the election, Putin rejected outright any allegations of meddling in the French election. He said “that doesn’t exist as a problem”, adding that Macron had not raised the issue at their meeting.
"This would complete the historical justice. Crimea returned to Russia and Putin returning to Russia's soul," said Mikhail, an ethnic Russian who owns a holiday apartment in one of the nearby blocks. "When Khrushchev gave away Crimea it was a terrible moment for all the Russians here, we have waited more than 60 years for this moment. It would be an honour to welcome the Russian president in Yalta."
