Uniformed soldiers block the famous Bosphorus Bridge connecting the European and Asian sides of Istanbul. Cars flow from the European side to the Asian side, but soldiers and military vehicles block the path to the European side.
Over the weekend, cities in Germany, Austria, the Netherlands and Belgium saw large-scale, mainly peaceful pro-Erdoğan demonstrations outside Turkish embassies and consulates. But a number of violent incidents have laid bare the level of acrimony between supporters and critics of the Turkish president.
Looking west, Erdoğan’s crackdown risks endangering relations with Europe, and specifically the EU-Turkey migration deal, with an increasing number of European leaders speaking out against Erdoğan’s post-coup approach. Finally, the rebel groups who enjoy Turkish support in northern Syria will be wondering what a distracted Turkey means for them.“Provocateurs are on the march,” Mr. Avakov added. “It’s a time for cool heads, the healthy consolidation of forces, and careful action.”
“There are clear signs that these incidents are a direct consequence of the recent developments in Turkey,” the organisation said in a statement. In Zaandam, the headquarters of Animo, another Gülen-oriented organisation, was targeted on Friday night by a group of about 20 young people who smashed the windows and chanted pro-Erdoğan slogans.
European leaders are struggling to contain tensions in the Turkish diaspora community after the failed coup widened the gulf between supporters of the president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and the man he accuses of orchestrating the uprising, Fethullah Gülen.
Suddenly, chaos, confusion
Gülen, an Islamic preacher exiled in the US, has accused his former ally, Erdoğan, of staging Friday’s coup to legitimise a crackdown on critical forces in Turkey.
But it was unclear how much authority Mr. Avakov has over the police and other state services in Crimea, where a heavily ethnic Russian and Russian-speaking population mostly views the Ukrainian government installed after the ouster last weekend of Mr. Yanukovych as the illegitimate result of a fascist coup.
Amid the turmoil in Crimea, Arsen Avakov, Ukraine’s acting interior minister, called for calm in a posting on his Facebook page, saying that unspecified measures were “being taken to counter the extremist actions and prevent an escalation of an armed conflict in the center of the city.”
