But this vote was also a rejection by my fellow countrymen, from my parents’ generation to mine, of everything I cherished about Europe, Britain and my own childhood: the sense that our differences were less important than our shared experiences. We could travel across an old and cultured Continent, have access to jobs in 27 other countries, and make friends from all over.
His address was delayed by more than an hour as the government apparently pursued attempts to secure that mediation. A Catalan government spokesman confirmed that a mediation effort was going on but did not provide further details.
Sturgeon appeared to refer to pleas from senior SNP figures – including Ian Blackford, her Westminster leader, and Pete Wishart, the party’s longest-serving MP – to take time preparing a coherent economic and practical case for independence.
Nearly 4 million people have signed a petition calling for a new referendum. Parliament should consider it, Branson said.
Sturgeon was introduced for her speech on the final day of the conference by her deputy leader. Angus Robertson has been given an enhanced role to galvanise the party’s 120,000 members despite losing his Westminster seat to the Tories, who routed the SNP in north-east Scotland.
Energy plan is one of several aimed at boosting SNP’s appeal to rural and leftwing voters after party lost Westminster seats
Japan’s financial authorities have not ruled out intervening in currency markets to stem the yen’s rise, despite warnings against intervention from the US.
Nicola Sturgeon has pledged to set up a state-owned energy company in Scotland to offer cheaper power to homeowners, as she seeks to restore her battered party’s confidence.
In a sign of growing radicalism among activists, SNP delegates voted overwhelmingly for a motion calling for the royal family to lose its automatic share of profits from the crown estate, a state body which owns coastal seabed, royal parks, Ascot racecourse and shopping centres.
Don't make dialogue impossible, Donald Tusk tells Carles Puigdemont Read more
