The vote by Iraqi Kurds on their desire for independence, due to take place on Monday, poses real risks in an unstable region. But their case deserves to be heard
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Rather than negotiate and then seek international recognition, as the United States and others had asked, the Kurds forged ahead with the referendum.
ERBIL, Iraq — After a century of yearning, the Kurds of Iraq have managed, at last, to pull off a vote for independence, but not without antagonizing nearly everyone in perhaps the world’s most volatile region.
But if anything, the vote, while satisfying the Kurds emotionally, may have set back their national aspirations.With its troubled economy and dearth of democratic institutions, its prospects were already tenuous. Its best hopes lay in its oil reserves and American support, but Turkey has threatened to cut off its oil pipeline, and the relationship with the United States soured after the Kurds rebuffed its entreaties to cancel the vote.
The question now is whether an arid, landlocked proto-state dependent on hostile neighbors can overcome is own shortcomings — and Iraq’s disruptive retaliation — to build a viable path to independence.
The referendum is “not the end itself”, Mr Barzani told the Guardian: the near-certain victory will declare the desire for independence. There is room for negotiation. But Erbil will not go back to the table with a Baghdad that has no incentive to compromise, armed only with vague expressions of international goodwill. The Kurds want a UN-mandated solution, with a clear agenda, putting them on a path to their end goal through measures such as an enforceable deal on sharing oil revenues – as agreed but not maintained after the Iraq war. And their arguments have merit.
If not now, when? This is the obvious and reasonable question of Iraqi Kurds seeking to exercise the right to self-determination – enshrined by the UN charter, though often ignored – in a referendum on Monday. They already enjoy a high degree of autonomy. They believe their key role in the fight against Islamic State demands recognition, giving them leverage over western powers; and that the alternative is continued, subordinate membership of a broken and divided Iraq, a century after the Sykes-Picot carve-up.
The vote has strengthened Mr Barzani’s position among his people; how much it will achieve for them is less clear. But denying their dream will come at a cost, too. There is still a little room and time for manoeuvre. It should be used, and with the utmost care.