The strike by the United States made him mildly optimistic that Mr. Trump would intervene more forcefully than Mr. Obama had.
While the world learned about North Korea's latest military test -- in which it flew an intermediate-range missile over Japan -- shortly after it took place early Tuesday morning, in Pyongyang the announcement was not made until the following afternoon.
“Of course chemicals are weapons of mass destruction,” said a doctor east of Damascus who treated victims of the first major chemical attack in Syria, in 2013. He spoke on condition of anonymity because he feared government reprisal. “But what about sieges? What about killing children? Isn’t it wrong for children to grow up without knowing Tom and Jerry? Without knowing chocolate?”
The comments often appear alongside Photoshopped images of the statues in demeaning poses. “As a Korean in Japan, it is deeply offensive to have to look at those images,” she said.
“The odds of a recession are low,” she said. Even as the Fed chairwoman listed headwinds like a weak manufacturing sector, lower commodity prices and job losses in the energy sector, she said, “I remain quite optimistic.”
The network soon lost its Russian image, re-branding itself as "RT," its English-language broadcasts featuring young Americans, and concentrating largely  on American news.
Accounting for nearly 90% of Pyongyang's imports, China is by far North Korea's most important benefactor. US Presidents dating back to the Bush administration have tried to get China to use its economic leverage to rein in its unruly neighbor.
He added that Pyongyang's "deeply counterproductive" methods showed how ignorant it was of South Korea.
Even as Ms. Haley called for more diplomacy, Mr. Trump agreed in a phone call on Monday evening with South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in, to allow South Korea to build more powerful non-nuclear ballistic missiles, said Park Soo-hyun, a spokesman for Mr. Moon. While the South has pressed for such permission for many years, the change is unlikely to alter the strategic balance on the Korean Peninsula.
A more recent US State Department-sponsored report notes that "Ukraine's strategic location between the main energy producers (Russia and the Caspian Sea area) and consumers in the Eurasian region, its large transit network, and its available underground gas storage capacities", make the country "a potentially crucial player in European energy transit" - a position that will "grow as Western European demands for Russian and Caspian gas and oil continue to increase."
