Turkish generals resign as government prepares to overhaul armed forces Read more
Carles Puigdemont, the head of Catalonia’s pro-sovereignty government, described the raids as a “a co-ordinated police assault” that showed that Madrid “has de facto suspended self-government and applied a de facto state of emergency” in Catalonia.
Tymoshenko was sentenced to seven years in prison after being convicted of abuse of authority over a natural gas deal negotiated with Russia. Western governments said the case against her was politically motivated.
The workers were not sure of the identity of the body brought to the cemetery, but local media said the first to be interred there was Mehmet Karabekir, a 34-year-old captain and father of two. His mother, they reported, refused to claim his body, so he was taken to the new cemetery.
in his TV address, Rajoy called on Catalonia’s regional leaders to cancel the referendum on the grounds that it goes against Spain’s laws. “Don’t go ahead. Go back to the law and democracy. This referendum is a chimera,” he said.
The West should aim to impose significant costs on Russia that will lead Putin to rethink his actions.  That likely will prove difficult, but there can be no business as usual with Moscow.
But thousands of protesters, alleging electoral fraud, surrounded government buildings, camping in the snow and waving orange flags. Eventually, Putin's Ukrainian allies capitulated. The Supreme Court called another round of voting, and voters dumped Yanukovych in favor of a politician, Viktor Yushchenko, who called for Ukraine's rapid admission to NATO. 

There's no indication yet NATO will intervene militarily, but its members may take action other ways. That includes actions targeting Moscow (like Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper announcing the cancellation of military activities involving his and Russia's militaries), punitive measures like sanctions against Ukrainian individuals or groups or helping prop up that nation's shaky economy.
Second, Washington and London should work with the European Union and others to impose political, diplomatic and economic sanctions on Moscow unless and until Russia ceases its violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity.  This has begun.  On Sunday, the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, France, Italy, Canada and Japan announced they were suspending preparations to take part in the G8 summit to be hosted in June in Sochi by Russian President Vladimir Putin.  Other steps have been taken, and still others are being planned.
