The denunciations of critics of the Ukraine policy have further unnerved opposition figures. Their unease was compounded amid a rush of recent moves to silence dissenting voices — virtually shuttering the main independent television station, removing a news editor deemed insufficiently loyal, shutting opposition websites and continuing to brand nongovernmental organizations receiving money from abroad as “foreign agents.”
Rajoy, left, called Saturday for the removal of Catalan President Carles Puigdemont.
Amid widespread criticism of the Ukip leader's claim in his TV debate with Nick Clegg that the EU had "blood on its hands" after the violence in Kiev, Farage said the EU had destabilised a series of countries.
One miner says orders from Russia are drying up. He thinks Russia does not want to deal with them because of the chaos in Kiev. Photograph: Yves Herman/Reuters
Muzychko, a leader of Right Sector, a far-right group prominent in the recent anti-government protests, was wanted "for his criminal background and illegal carrying of weapons," the ministry said.
“Putin has drawn a red line — he has made it clear that ‘you are either with us or against us,’ ” said Mark Reznik, a broker at A & I Broadway Realty, which has many clients from the former Soviet Union. “There is so much propaganda in Russia, people are scared to do business here.”
He was killed late Monday in what the Ukrainian Interior Ministry said was a shootout with police in Rivne. Ukrainian lawmaker Oleksandr Doniy, whose constituency is in Rivne, gave a different version of events, saying the activist was dragged into a car and then shot.
The 300,000-strong minority make up less than 15% of Crimea's population of 2 million and has strongly opposed the Russian annexation. The proposal to seek autonomy was seen as a sign that the group is now ready to accept the new status quo and negotiate their place in it with Russia.
More than 2.25 million people turned out to vote, with the regional government reporting that 90% of voters favored a split from Madrid. But the turnout was low -- around 43% of the voter roll -- which Catalan officials blamed on the central government's efforts to stop the referendum.
Russia's takeover of Crimea meant it was imperative for the UK to protect its defence budget, he said, even if that meant other departments suffered.
