An aide to senator Bob Corker, the ranking Republican on the committee, said the legislation currently being drafted included authorisation for the $1bn loan guarantee, announced by Kerry in Kiev, but was also likely to include wording on sanctions.
The distance between the Maidan in downtown Kiev, Ukraine, and the WhatsApp headquarters in downtown Mountain View, California, is 6,139 miles. This quite long distance, however, is bridged by another figure: the number 19. 
The White House is balancing a number of competing pressures.
While Yanukovych is on the run, the diplomatic wheels have been set in motion within the international community.
What outcome are you most hoping for?
The Night Wolves will not reveal precisely how many members they have, but across the region they claim that, alongside other pro-Russian groups, more than 20,000 men can be quickly mobilised. "I am sure you have seen our work when you came into the city," Sinichkin says with a wry smile. The gang claim to have set up five or more road blocks to police all traffic entering Sevastopol city. They say they are being supported by other ad hoc civilian defence units that have sprung up over the last week.

A disagreement between Obama and Congress would be reminiscent of the recent clash over new Iran sanctions, when the White House had to battle hard to thwart legislation on Capitol Hill it said would thwart delicate nuclear negotiations with Tehran.
Avakov is a member of the Fatherland party. In 2012-13 he lived in Italy after the Ukrainian authorities investigated him over the allegedly illegal privatisation of land. Italy refused to extradite him and he claimed the case was politically motivated. In 1990 Avakov founded and headed two financial firms, Investor and Bank Basis, which became the Commercial Bank in 1992.
Last week, the bloody street clashes between demonstrators and security forces left more than 80 dead, the deadliest violence in the country since it gained independence when the Soviet Union collapsed 22 years ago.
