The following is a partial transcript of communication between an unidentified crew member aboard the sinking South Korean ferry Sewol and local maritime traffic control centers on Wednesday. 
In May 2013, a tugboat capsized off West Africa. Rescuers pulled out a man from 100 feet below the surface who survived 2<U+00BD> days inside a 4-square-foot air pocket. 
It may take a while to determine why the South Korean ferry Sewol turned on its side and sank last Wednesday, but already now we know that the image of its captain, Lee Jun-seok, walking to safety even as scores of high school students were struggling desperately for their lives in the capsized hull, has already entered the annals of shame.
The Titanic’s captain, E. J. Smith, was probably steaming too fast when the giant ship hit an iceberg, but he later won praise for helping to save more than 700 lives. He insisted that women and children be evacuated first, and he stayed near the bridge as the ship went down.
Nigeria is complex and messy and unfamiliar. It is easy to feel that what happens there is not real in the way that what happens on camera in South Korea is real. Watching the images of the almost mad grief of the parents, ready to plunge into the water themselves to find their sons and daughters, is like an awful realisation of one's own worst imaginings.
The divers weren't able to recover the three bodies from a compartment, the coast guard said.  Another 40 dives are planned for Saturday in an attempt to get inside the ferry, the coast guards' Koh Myung Seok told reporters. 
The effort was still underway in earnest Saturday morning featuring helicopters circling above the water and about 120 vessels --  from large warships to fishing ships to dinghies -- in the water, in addition to the divers under it.
Search crews brought more than a dozen bodies to shore Sunday morning, a solemn process pierced by screams and cries from the passengers' families.
Sewol: The ship rolled over a lot right now. Cannot move. Please come quickly. We're next to Byeongpung Island.
During this period, several students from the high school came to the funeral home to pay their respects to Kang's family. Dressed in their school uniforms, they bowed to the family.
