• Polly Toynbee is right (There is still time for hope – Brexiters can be persuaded, 7 June). Brexiters can be persuaded if they realise what British politics could be like after a vote to leave. Here’s a realistic scenario.
While he has been vocal in his support for a unified Ukraine, the tycoon has said he will not take any active role in government for the time being. But with presidential elections around the corner, and a parliamentary election to follow shortly after, that may change.
Associated Press contributed to this reportHilda Hayden
The “leave” camp argues that it has been too easy for “migrant workers” from Europe to waltz into the country and take British jobs. “We have absolutely no power to control the numbers who are coming with no job offers and no qualifications from the 28 E.U. countries,” Boris Johnson, the former London mayor, said in a recent speech rallying for a Brexit.
Around the corner at Suvlaki, a Greek restaurant specializing in grilled meat skewers and stuffed pitas, the owner, Yannis Theodorakakos, was preparing to tally the impact if he needed to obtain work visas for the 13 European citizens working on his staff.
A recent survey by professional services firm EY found that 72% of global companies see access to Europe as a key factor in deciding where to put their money. Nearly a third intended to either freeze or reduce their investment in the U.K. until the result of the referendum is known. Real estate investment has already been hit hard.
But I don’t think the 1992 experience would be repeated. That devaluation was healthy because the government was relieved of its obligation to “defend” an overvalued pound with damagingly high interest rates after the breakdown of the exchange rate mechanism. This time, a large devaluation would be much less benign than in 1992, for at least three reasons.
Haley said that when the UN fails in its duty, “there are times in the life of states when we are compelled to take our own actions”. The White House spokesman, Sean Spicer, said on Tuesday: “Rest assured that I think [Trump] has been speaking with his national security team this morning, and we will continue to have that discussion both internally with our national security team, as well as with our allies around the globe.”
“I think the British public would react adversely to such a threat based on the chancellor being afraid they will vote the wrong way in his opinion. The in campaign are panicking – but no one will believe these hysterical prophecies of doom anymore.”
