Now more than 400,000 people have been killed, a figure roughly equal to the population of Tulsa, Okla., or Oakland, Calif. Many more have been maimed.
"These North Korean missile tests are emblematic of the ongoing security dilemma where there are hostile parties taking steps to deter the other, and each improvement on one side's deterrent capability is a provocation to the other side."
"The bottom line is they flew a missile over a neighboring country without giving them a heads up," said John Delury, a professor at Yonsei University's Graduate School of International Studies.
Though the meeting is on the agenda, it's not clear what the Security Council can do to stop North Korea firing off missiles.
More sanctions?
"Much upset by (North Korea's) successful ICBM test-launches, Trump ran riot, talking about 'fire and fury' unprecedented in the world," KCNA said, accusing Trump of adding "fuel to the aggravated situation."
North Korean state media has yet to acknowledge Tuesday's launch, but a recent commentary published by state news agency KCNA accused Trump of being a "source of headache(s) at home and abroad."
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
But over time, the government has nudged the definition of self-defense into a more assertive posture. Recently, it has quietly discussed the possibility of acquiring cruise missiles allowing it to pre-emptively strike a missile launch site if it detected signs of an imminent attack.
Japan has long interpreted its pacifist Constitution to allow it to conduct self-defense operations, and it has more than 225,000 active-duty troops and advanced armaments like naval destroyers equipped with sophisticated missile defense and fighter jets.
