You wouldn’t have known it, however, by looking at their blank faces. “We’ve seen so much of this,” Mr. Abu Amash said. “It’s normal. We see this every day. We had six years of it.”"The Syrian army holds the terrorist groups and those supporting them responsible for the use of chemical and poisonous material and for the careless wasting of innocent civilians' lives to achieve their despicable goals and agendas," the statement said.
The raid in Khan Sheikhun indicates Assad’s growing confidence. He has wrested control of territory from the rebels, including the entire city of Aleppo, in recent months. His regime has benefited from the unflinching support of Moscow and Shia militias backed by Iran, as well as waning support for the opposition by its allies in the region and the new US administration.
The Aleppo Media Center put the death toll at 70 but there were different numbers from other groups. The UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said at least 58 were dead, including 10 children. The High Negotiations Committee, an umbrella opposition group, said as many as 100 died.

A man carries a child into a makeshift hospital after Tuesday's attack in Idlib province.
Syrian military denies responsibility
On Tuesday night, Britain, France and the United States were pushing the Security Council to adopt a resolution that condemns the attack and orders the Syrian government to provide all flight logs, flight plans and names of commanders in charge of air operations, including those for Tuesday, to international investigators.
"Today's chemical attack in Syria against innocent people, including women and children, is reprehensible and cannot be ignored by the civilized world," US President Donald Trump said, adding that he thinks the attacks was a consequence of the past administration's weakness and irresolution. "President Obama said in 2012 that he would establish a 'red line' against the use of chemical weapons and then did nothing."
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Breaking News Emails Sign up to receive an email from The New York Times as soon as important news breaks around the world. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
