Obama said he believes Putin still harbors a grievance over the 1991 dissolution of the Soviet Union. "You would have thought that, after a couple of decades, there'd be an awareness on the part of any Russian leader that the path forward is not to revert back to the kinds of practices that were so prevalent during the Cold War."
French spies amassed and publicly released evidence last month that indicated the Assad regime had used toxic sarin gas on the town of Khan Sheikhun, an attack that provoked the US to launch missiles on a Syrian air base in its first targeted attack against the Syrian president’s forces.
“The risk was enormous,” said Werner Kogler, a member of the Austrian Parliament and deputy leader of the opposition Green Party. The banks, he said, “always knew if something went wrong the taxpayers would pick up the tab in the end.” He added: “We’re paying now.”
Dolphins are a crucial part of open-water security. They detect sounds and objects in murky waters that  human beings can't, making them uniquely effective at highlighting dangers on the sea floor.
Following Moscow's "armed illegal aggression", Russia had become a "strategic adversary" of Nato rather than a "strategic partner", he said, and he argued that the UK and other European nations needed to protect their defence budgets to deter Russia, even if it meant cuts to other Whitehall departments.
Puigdemont also demanded Spain end its "repression" of Catalan separatist leaders, two of whom were taken into custody on suspicion of sedition earlier in the week.
He rejected the notion that Russia's concerns over maintaining its influence along its borders might justify its invasion of other countries.
But since Crimea's annexation, local people expect the transfer of the property to Putin to be little more than a formality. Last week Crimea's new prime minister, Sergei Aksyonov, announced that all the property formerly owned by the Ukrainian state would be nationalised.
"Putin has his second shot at the dacha, and the goal is wide open," said Maik Lvovskiy, an investigative journalist who followed the 2004 paper trail that led all the way from Yalta to Moscow. "If he pursued it before, then I can't see why he wouldn't take it now; there are absolutely no obstacles in his way at all. He can pretty much walk straight through the front door," Lvovskiy said.
Speaking to the state-run newspaper Rossiskaya Gazeta, in comments first noted by the Moscow Times, Seagal described western policy on Ukraine as "idiotic". He said Putin's desire "to protect the Russian-speaking people of Crimea, his assets, and the Russian Black Sea military base in Sevastopol … [was] very reasonable".
