MADRID — A judge who sits on Spain’s Supreme Court on Thursday granted bail to a handful of Catalan lawmakers awaiting trial on rebellion charges in contrast with the jailing last week of former members of the Catalan government.
It is worth reminding ourselves of which Catalans have had a role in Spanish politics. It has been, overwhelmingly, the Catalan elites, which brings us to another important detail: Catalan nationalism is neither inclusive nor progressive. Catalonia is inhabited by two cultural communities, each representing about half the population. But in terms of income, social status and influence the difference is stark. The Spanish-speaking population, immigrants or descendants of economic migrants who arrived in the 20th century, is, on average, less wealthy, less educated and less politically mobilised.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.A criminal court judge ordered eight of the Catalan politicians, who appeared in court in Madrid to be jailed without bail, pending a full trial. Separately, another judge from the Supreme Court granted bail this month to five other Catalan lawmakers awaiting trial on rebellion charges.
Forcadell will have to pay bail of 150,000 euros in order to be released.
(CNN) A Spanish Supreme Court judge granted bail Thursday to former Catalan Parliament Speaker Carme Forcadell and four other Catalan lawmakers who appeared in court on charges of rebellion, sedition and misappropriation, according to a court statement.
Intellectuals who helped trigger pro-democracy protests hand themselves in, with dozens of supporters planning to follow suit
The Spanish high court has jailed eight former Catalan government members, along with the leaders of the Catalan National Assembly (ANC) and Omnium Cultural, while investigations continue.
Mr. Maza was known as a conservative who put himself on the front line in the fight against Catalan secessionism. In September, he warned Mr. Puigdemont in a radio interview that the Catalan leader could be detained if he pushed ahead with his separatist plans.
