Sterling guesswork as financial sector calculates Brexit effect Read more
Today, there are speculative forces in the markets much bigger and more powerful. And they will be eager to exploit any miscalculations by the British government or British voters. A vote for Brexit would make some people very rich – but most voters considerably poorer.
EU referendum splits Britain down the middle as contest resumes Read more
For all these reasons I believe the devaluation this time would be more like the one in 1967, when Harold Wilson famously declared that “the pound in your pocket has not been devalued”, but the British people disagreed with him, quickly noticing that the cost of imports and foreign holidays were rising sharply and that their true living standards were going down. Meanwhile financial speculators, back then called the Gnomes of Zurich, were making large profits at Britain’s expense.
This isn’t an entirely new phenomenon. I remember a few years ago being on a diversity scheme when the conversation turned to the topic of immigration. I was shocked to hear several participants express their concerns about the number of immigrants coming from eastern Europe. “I worry about if there are enough jobs to go round,” said one young woman who had applied for the scheme on the basis of her Indian background.
Around the corner at Suvlaki, a Greek restaurant specializing in grilled meat skewers and stuffed pitas, the owner, Yannis Theodorakakos, was preparing to tally the impact if he needed to obtain work visas for the 13 European citizens working on his staff.
I want people to know what the consequences of leaving the EU would be before they cast their votes, rather than after. A vote to leave could see the week end with a Black Friday, and serious consequences for ordinary people.Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Nor is Queen Elizabeth II above the fray, at least for The Sun, Britain’s biggest paid-for daily tabloid. It reported that the monarch supports a Brexit, based on accounts of comments she ostensibly made about Europe before the referendum was called.
