Russia says that ousted Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, whom Moscow still recognizes as the country's legitimate leader, requested that Russia send in military forces.
The US and European Union have imposed sanctions on Russian and Ukrainian officials in response to Russian actions in Ukraine, which culminated on Sunday in Crimea's vote to join Russia. But Washington also appeared to be settling old scores, as several officials slapped with sanctions have had little to do with Russia's Ukraine policy, while some of the country's main Ukraine hawks were not on the list.
"We should do it, frankly," he told CNN, but adding that Russia should be offered an "exit ramp" out of the crisis through negotiations.
Russia's upper house of Parliament gives the green light for the incursion of military forces into Ukraine's volatile Crimea region. 
There are other approaches. Obama's former ambassador to Russia, Michael McFaul, urged the administration to intensify its policy of isolating Putin.
"We are very much worried about the concentration of troops on our eastern borders but at the same time we are ready to defend our homeland. Our military and civilians living in eastern Ukraine – Ukrainians, Russians other nationalities - are ready to defend their homeland, and our military is also ready to defend Ukraine.""It's a difficult situation in the past few hours," Churkin said, claiming that there were Ukrainian forces from Kiev en route to to overthrow the local pro-Russian governments in eastern Ukraine and Crimea and establish new ones that would enforce the power of the new Ukrainian government. 
The United States "will stand by the Ukrainian people," he said after accusing Russia of making up reasons for further military intervention in Ukraine based on alleged persecution of Russian speakers and native Russians.
Yatsenyuk is in Brussels to sign the political part of an association agreement with the European Union.
Obama and Kerry both urged Russia to pull its forces back into their barracks and agree to international observers in Ukraine to monitor the situation. 
