I also commend the Ukrainian government's restraint and its commitment to uphold its international obligations.  We will continue to coordinate closely with our European allies.  We will continue to communicate directly with the Russian government.  And we will continue to keep all of you in the press corps and the American people informed as events develop.
The events of the past several months remind us of how difficult democracy can be in a country with deep divisions.  But the Ukrainian people have also reminded us that human beings have universal right to determine their own future.  Right now, the situation remains very fluid.  Vice President Biden just spoke with prime minister -- the prime minister of Ukraine to assure him that in this difficult moment, the United States supports his government's efforts and stands for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and democratic future of Ukraine.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Already, even as the government has arrested thousands of soldiers and officers who allegedly took part in the failed coup, there were signs that it was using the moment to widen a crackdown on perceived enemies. Alongside the military, the government also dismissed thousands of judges, who seemingly had no role to play in a military revolt.
Celebrations by his supporters continued on Sunday, with jubilant crowds marching through the streets of Istanbul.
My friends started texting me that it might be a coup so we told everyone we neeeded to leave the house. You shouldn’t be in an army house during a coup. We were terrified when my mum called me to leave immediately. There were no taxis or ubers. We hitchhiked to a more crowded non-army place and waited 30 mins for a taxi.
Saturday, 2:51 a.m.: The Turkish National Intelligence unit claims the coup is over.
Turkish state broadcaster TRT says it has been taken over by members of the military who were part of the coup attempt.
Turkish voters overlooked and forgave these infringements. They elected and twice re-elected Erdogan. Turkey achieved genuine economic progress during his rule. Ordinary Turks believed that their blunt, traditionalist prime minister cherished their interests in a way his more cosmopolitan predecessors did not.
Polls show that a week out from the once-in-a-generation referendum, so many people are still undecided on how to vote that they alone could determine the outcome. Many in the public have complained that the debate has been confusing, with different data being used by each camp to suit their purposes.
