He was accused of Machiavellian tactics while one MP urged him to stand aside for the sake of party unity.
On Monday, Ms. May insisted that “Brexit means Brexit,” as she sought to reassure right-wingers that she was committed to the policy, adding that “there will be no attempt to remain inside the E.U. There will be no attempts to rejoin it by the back door, no second referendum.”
Frances O’Grady, TUC general secretary, said: “Workers are still paying the price from the last recession, with UK wage growth far behind the rest of the OECD. With the OECD warning that Brexit will harm jobs and growth, we need urgent action from government to make sure that workers do not pay the price again.”
The financial markets continued to pummel stocks and the value of the British pound, at one point sending the currency to its lowest level against the dollar in more than three decades. And Standard & Poor’s, the ratings agency, downgraded Britain’s credit rating, reflecting concern about the economic implications of the so-called Brexit vote.
The energy minister and a former banker, she has already been backed by 41 MPs, including Boris Johnson.
JUST WATCHED David Cameron lays out steps to tackle hate crimes Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH David Cameron lays out steps to tackle hate crimes 01:24
Meeting in Berlin, Ms. Merkel, President François Hollande of France and Prime Minister Matteo Renzi of Italy said there would be no discussions, formal or informal, over Britain’s withdrawal until it formally invokes Article 50, the provision in the bloc’s governing treaty that sets out the process for a withdrawal.
“Our base is too narrow, and so, occasionally, are our sympathies,” she warned her colleagues. “You know what some people call us: the nasty party.”
Some voters have already said they regret their decision, especially after leading Brexit campaigners back-pedaled on a number of pledges they made.
On the stock market, there were fresh falls for housebuilders, which have been hard hit since the referendum result, and the suspension of three major commercial property funds. M&G Investments and Aviva Investors barred investors from withdrawing cash from their property funds on Tuesday amid fears of a crash in the commercial property market and Standard Life made the same move a day earlier.
