"We have detected gravitational waves. We did it," said David Reitze, executive director of LIGO, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory , which was created to do just what Reitze announced.
Over the next few years LUX will get another overhaul and about 10 tons of liquid xenon, essentially becoming a new detector named LUX_Zeplin, Murphy said, but the technical challenges mean results will likely have to wait until 2018.
Firstly, we have seen ripples in space-time! And the fact that we expected them makes that even more amazing in some ways. The understanding of the fabric of the universe which is contained in Einstein’s general relativity has made yet another valid prediction. In fact, the beautiful elegance of that theory is a little deceptive – actually solving those equations to get a real prediction, which tells you what kind of experiment you need to build to test the prediction, is a major mathematical challenge and a towering achievement in itself.
Prof B S Sathyaprakash, from Cardiff University’s school of physics and astronomy, said: “The shock would have released more energy than the light from all the stars in the universe for that brief instant. The fusion of two black holes which created this event had been predicted but never observed.”
At AAAS researchers looking for another type of mysterious particle, a fourth type of neutrino, called “sterile” because it does not carry even the weak charges as does its neutral counterparts – the normal neutrinos. Kam-Biu Luk, a physicist at the University of California at Berkeley, announced new data showing an “unexpected disagreement between our observation and predictions” in the search for the particles.
And they did so within weeks of turning on their new, upgraded instrument: it took just 20 milliseconds to catch the merger of two black holes, at a distance of 1.3 billion light years, somewhere beyond the Large Magellanic Cloud in the southern hemisphere sky, but it then took months of meticulous checking of the signal against all the complex computer simulations of black hole collision to make sure the evidence matched the theoretical template.
Dr. Thorne then recruited Dr. Drever, a gifted experimentalist from the University of Glasgow, to start a gravitational wave program at Caltech. Dr. Drever wanted to use light — laser beams bouncing between precisely positioned mirrors — to detect the squeeze and stretch of a passing wave.
Dr. Hulse and Dr. Taylor won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1993.
"He thought gravitational waves are a beautiful construct, but they are so small nobody would ever be able to actually measure it," said Marka.LIGO is described as "a system of two identical detectors" -- one located in Livingston, Louisiana, the other in Hanford, Washington -- "carefully constructed to detect incredibly tiny vibrations from passing gravitational waves." The project was created by scientists from Caltech and MIT and funded by the National Science Foundation.
