Tuesday’s attack struck Khan Sheikhun, where there are thousands of refugees from the nearby province of Hama who have fled recent fighting. The town is also on a crossroads between Hama and Idlib and is considered vital to any regime offensive towards the northern city of Idlib.
Youssef and many members of his extended family live on the northern edge of Khan Sheikhoun, a town in Syria's Idlib province. On Tuesday, airstrikes battered an area near their local bakery, meters from Youssef's home.
Chemical weapons attacks in Syria may normalise war crimes, experts warn Read more
Bashar al-Assad's regime accused of using illegal chemical weapons
Read MoreThe scale and horror of Tuesday’s gas attack on civilians in Idlib highlighted the vacuum in the Trump administration’s foreign policy making: the incident was met first by silence, then by criticism of Barack Obama.
Story highlights Abdul Hamid Youssef lost his wife and 9-month-old twins in attack on Syrian village
Western agencies scramble to obtain samples from Syria chemical attack Read more
Leaping from bed, Youssef scrambled to make sure his 9-month-old twins were still alive. Apparently unharmed, he passed them to his wife and told her to stay in the house.
“These heinous actions by the Bashar al-Assad regime are a consequence of the last administration’s weakness and irresolution,” he said in a statement. “President Obama said in 2012 that he would establish a ‘red line’ against the use of chemical weapons and then did nothing.”
It was only later in the day that the White House spokesman read out a statement from the president, in which Trump used the occasion to score a domestic political point against the Obama administration.
He pointed out that Obama had set down a “red line” in 2012 on the use of chemical weapons in Syria, but argued that Obama then “did nothing” when the Assad regime carried out a mass gas attack against the town of Ghouta in August 2013.
Inaction over Syria has exacted a terrible price | Jonathan Freedland Read more
US Syria policy: signs of shift as Trump son meets pro-Russia Damascus figure Read more
“The first reaction from Syrians is that this is a direct consequence of American statements about Assad not being a priority and giving him time and allowing him to stay in power,” Kodmani told Reuters in Washington.The families are connected by marriage and both come from Khan Sheikhoun, the village in rebel-held Idlib Province that residents said had been hit with chemical weapons earlier that morning.
As Mr. Youssef paced around the parking lot outside the hospital, he said he was scared not just for his wife on the other side of the hospital wall, who had arrived lying motionless on a stretcher, but for his relatives on the other side of the border. Many of them had also been poisoned by the gas but had not been deemed sick enough to be treated in Turkey, whose border is closed to most Syrians.
Warplanes had roared overhead just before 7 a.m., when many people in the town were sleeping after a night of intense sounds of bombing, said Othman al-Khan, an activist in Khan Sheikhoun who was reached via phone at a first aid station.
(CNN) Abdul Hamid Youssef says the attack shook him from a deep sleep.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
This story contains graphic imagery.
“Driving against the wind, my eyes started burning and I felt I was being suffocated,” he added. “People were running away from the site and falling on the ground. It was a cruel scene. At that point I fainted.”
Rushing outside to check on his parents next door, Youssef passed people staggering and falling in the street.
As they watched the ambulances come and go outside the hospital in Reyhanli, Mr. Youssef and several of his relatives wondered what President Trump might make of all this.
On Monday, Mr. Trump’s administration signaled that it no longer saw the departure of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria as a priority. On Tuesday, Mr. Assad appeared to unleash one of the worst chemical attacks of the war.
“If Donald Trump is happy for this to happen to his own people and his own children,” said Mr. Youssef, “then we’re happy to keep Bashar al-Assad.”
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
A man narrating a video of motionless children, lined up as if sleeping, was able to come up only with sentence fragments. “A whole family,” he repeated.
BEIRUT, Lebanon — One of the worst chemical bombings in Syria turned a northern rebel-held area into a toxic kill zone on Tuesday, inciting international outrage over the ever-increasing government impunity shown in the country’s six-year war.
Western leaders including President Trump blamed the Syrian government of President Bashar al-Assad and called on its patrons, Russia and Iran, to prevent a recurrence of what many described as a war crime.
The government of Mr. Assad, who renounced chemical weapons nearly four years ago after a large chemical attack that American intelligence agencies concluded was carried out by his forces, denied that his military had been responsible, as he has done every time chemical munitions have been used in Syria.
A statement from the Syrian military accused insurgents of responsibility and said they had accused the army of using toxic weapons “every time they fail to achieve the goals of their sponsors.”
But only the Syrian military had the ability and the motive to carry out an aerial attack like the one that struck the rebel-held town of Khan Sheikhoun.
Russia offered another explanation. A spokesman for its Defense Ministry, Maj. Gen. Igor Konashenkov, said Syrian warplanes had struck an insurgent storehouse containing toxic substances to be used in chemical weapons.
Witnesses to the attack said it began before 7 a.m. Numerous photographs and graphic videos posted online by activists and residents showed children and older adults gasping and struggling to breathe, or lying motionless in the mud as rescue workers ripped off victims’ clothes and hosed them down. The bodies of at least 10 children lay lined up on the ground or under a quilt.
At the same time, Mr. Trump’s spokesman, Sean Spicer, denounced Mr. Obama for having failed to make good on his famous “red line” statement in 2012, suggesting he would intervene militarily in Syria if Mr. Assad used chemical weapons.
The attack appeared to be the deadliest chemical attack in Syria since the August 2013 assault. Under threat of United States retaliation, Mr. Assad agreed to a Russian-American deal to eliminate his country’s chemical weapons program, which until that time it had denied having, and to join an international treaty banning chemical weapons.
But the operation took far longer than expected and raised questions about whether all the materials were accounted for. The head of the international monitoring body, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, complained in an internal report about misleading statements from Damascus and expressed concern about possible undeclared chemical weapons.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons has also accused the Islamic State of using banned mustard gas in Iraq and Syria. The area around Khan Sheikhoun is not held by the Islamic State, but by other insurgents: Qaeda-linked militants and a variety of other rebel groups.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad 's military denied using chemical weapons and blamed rebels for the carnage. Russia, Syria's strong ally, said it had no warplanes in the vicinity.
Airstrikes hit the rebel-held city of Khan Sheikhoun in Idlib province on Tuesday morning, giving off a "poisonous gas," according to Anas al-Diab, an activist with the Aleppo Media Center.
A man carries a child into a makeshift hospital after Tuesday's attack in Idlib province.
Abdullah, who had common side effects of a nerve gas attack -- blurred vision, a splitting headache and lethargy -- told CNN the scene was chaos. Families died in their homes, and in the streets, children risked exposure looking for their parents.
At first, people were unaware it was a gas attack, Abdullah said. People who rushed to help others were overtaken by the gas, including several White Helmets, who had to be rescued by others from the group, also known as the Syrian Civil Defense.
In an apparent reference to the crisis, two state-run Syrian media outlets earlier reported an explosion at a "rebel poison gas factory" in the countryside of Idlib province, implying that it was an accident related to rebels building chemical weapons. Idlib province is largely controlled by an alliance of rebel forces and is regularly targeted in airstrikes by the Syrian military and its ally, Russia.
If reports of a chemical attack by the regime are confirmed, experts say it could be the biggest since Ghouta.
Referring to the 2013 chemical attack, McCain told CNN: "We've seen this movie before, it was when Barack Obama said they would have a red line, they crossed it and he did nothing. Bashar Assad and his friends, the Russians, take note of what Americans say."
Analyst: Regime may increase attacks
"The regime has been systematically using small scale (chemical) attacks over a long time in order to normalize the use of those attacks," said Haid, an associate fellow at Chatham House, an international policy think tank based in London.
"Once the regime is sure that the attacks won't trigger any sort of reaction from the international community, I believe the regime will start increasing those attacks."Story highlights Sean Spicer blamed the Obama administration
(CNN) White House press secretary Sean Spicer told reporters Tuesday that a gas attack in a rebel-controlled area of Syria was perpetrated by the forces tied to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and are a "consequence of the past administration's weakness and irresolution."
"The US government is working to ascertain the truth behind this incident, but it has the fingerprints of a regime attack," the official said. "If the Assad regime was indeed responsible for perpetrating this attack, the reported casualty figures would make it the biggest incident like this since the Syrian regime sarin attack in August 2013 against the Damascus suburbs."
Two US officials separately tell CNN that it appears the regime may have used sarin, but the testing to verify that is not complete. However, this early belief is based on the high casualty count and level of injuries.
Read More