On the one hand, this was expected. We know that mass bends space and time, and so when mass moves it really should cause ripples in space and time, in much the same way that a gymnast moving on the surface of a trampoline causes ripples in the cloth.
So, space is like the ocean and all the planets, stars and galaxies are like boats and objects sitting on its surface. Even though we can’t feel it, there are waves in space that make the Earth bob every so slightly. Those waves are caused by gravity.
If you put two heavy bowling balls on a trampoline, the trampoline will bend downwards under each ball and the balls will start rolling around and move towards each other as they fall into each other’s dent. The heavy balls stretch the trampoline (that’s why they create dents), and, in space, black holes stretch the universe in the same way.
A disturbance in the cosmos could cause space-time to stretch, collapse and even jiggle, like a mattress shaking when that sleeper rolls over, producing ripples of gravity: gravitational waves.
And yet it moved the LIGO mirrors only four one-thousandths of the diameter of a proton.
The announcement is the climax of a century of speculation, 50 years of trial and error, and 25 years perfecting a set of instruments so sensitive they could identify a distortion in spacetime a thousandth the diameter of one atomic nucleus across a 4km strip of laserbeam and mirror.
Between them, they delivered an instrument so sensitive that it could detect a variation smaller than the nucleus of an atom over a length of four kilometres.
The scientists detected their cataclysmic event using an instrument so sensitive it could detect a change in the distance between the solar system and the nearest star four light years away to the thickness of a human hair.
However, the waves are so small that it takes a detector like LIGO, capable of measuring distortions one-thousandth the size of a proton, to observe them. They were observed on September 14, 2015.
Shortly after the September event, LIGO recorded another, weaker signal that was probably also from black holes, the team said. According to Dr. Weiss, there were at least four detections during the first LIGO observing run, which ended in January. The second run will begin this summer. In the fall, another detector, Advanced Virgo, operated by the European Gravitational Observatory in Italy, will start up. There are hopes for more in the future, in India and Japan.
