Kiev turns into battleground as police and special forces are issued with combat weapons
But Yanukovych claims he's still in charge, saying he was forced to leave Kiev because of a "coup."
Within an hour, the area surrounding the Ukrania hotel, which had been under the control of riot police, fell to the protesters. The police lines dissolved as they were bussed away to be replaced by the feared "Berkut" special forces. Kiev soon became a battleground.
Anti-government protesters try to shelter behind their shields during clashes with police in the center of Kiev. Photograph: Sergei Supinsky/AFP/Getty Images
Olesya Zhukovskaya a medic and activist reportedly shot in Kiev.
An Associated Press reporter witnessed 21 bodies laid out on the edge of the sprawling protest encampment in central Kiev. One policeman was killed and 28 suffered gunshot wounds, spokesman Serhiy Burlakov told AP.
Protesters stand on barricades in Kiev. Photograph: Louisa Gouliamaki/AFP/Getty Images
Protesters were also seen leading policemen with hands held high around the sprawling protest camp in central Kiev. Ukraine's interior ministry said 67 police were captured. They were being held in Kiev's occupied city hall, an opposition lawmaker said.
With the bloodshed still underway, the EU prepared to impose sanctions on those responsible for the deadly violence and arms embargo on the country. These sanctions could be avoided if Viktor Yanukovych, the Ukrainian president, is prepared to bend towards the demands of the pro-European protesters.
"In light of the deteriorating situation, the EU [has decided] as a matter of urgency on targeted measures against those responsible for violence and use of excessive force," said a draft statement of the resolution obtained by Reuters.
Map of Kiev showing the site of the recent clashes. Photograph: /the Guardian
"Any further escalation, including the introduction of a state of emergency, or the use of the armed forces against protesters must be avoided," it said.
William Hague, the British foreign secretary, described the killing of protesters in Kiev as "utterly unacceptable and indefensible" as he arrived for the EU meeting.
In Tuesday's operations, riot police retook control of a large tract of the square for the first time, reducing the protest camp to damp smoking rubble and debris. But Thursday morning's violent counteroffensive reversed those police gains and expanded, for the present, the area of central Kiev under the opposition.
The escalation of violence, following the deaths of at least 26 on Tuesday in major clashes, coincided with the arrival in Kiev of the German, Polish, and French foreign ministers on a mediation mission which looked doomed to failure.
Ahead of the EU mediation effort, Yanukovych called a truce in the standoff, a ceasefire that lasted about 12 hours only for the clashes to escalate.
Yanukovych's security service chiefs also announced they were launching a nationwide "anti-terrorist" campaign, though it was not clear what this meant or what it would entail.
The Russian prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, said on Thursday that Yanukovych should not be a "doormat", in what seemed the latest words from Moscow urging the authorities to crack down on the protests.
Smoke rises above burning barricades as dawn breaks on Kiev's Independence Square on Thursday. Photograph: David Mdzinarishvili/Reuters
Bogdana Matsotska, a Ukrainian skier, has left the Olympics in "solidarity" with Kiev's protesters. Bogdana's father said he and his daughter were both "extremely angry" Yanukovych.
“In the last three months,” the governor, Andrei V. Shishatsky, said at a news conference, “I did not have a personal meeting with Yanukovych — only phone calls.”
He said he had finally decided to call it quits on Tuesday, and now hoped to get work in Russia. Crimea, which Russia transferred to Ukraine in 1954, is still almost entirely Russian-speaking and home to the headquarters of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet. It voted overwhelmingly for Mr. Yanukovych in 2010 — he received 84 percent of the vote against Yulia V. Tymoshenko, the former prime minister — embracing him as a strong and reliable leader who would hold the forces of Ukrainian nationalism at bay and strengthen ties with Moscow. Most residents cheered in November when Mr. Yanukovych rejected a trade deal with the European Union and turned to Moscow instead.
In Sevastopol, residents told CNN they were angry that President Viktor Yanukovych has been forced out and fear that they will be oppressed by the country's new leaders.
Back in Kiev, Andrii Parubii, chief of national security and defense, said Ukrainian military and police forces had stopped Russian military forces from seizing two airports in the Crimean region.
The Ukrainian National Security Council ordered the mobilization as Russian President Vladimir Putin appeared to dismiss warnings from world leaders to avoid military intervention in Crimea, a senior Ukrainian official, Andriy Parubiy, said. The news came as evidence mounted that pro-Russian forces were already in Crimea, an autonomous region of eastern Ukraine with strong loyalty to neighboring Russia.
Eastern Ukraine and the Crimea have closer ties to Russia, while Western Ukraine is more friendly with Europe. Many Eastern Ukrainians still speak Russian, and the 2010 presidential elections divided the country with Eastern Ukraine voting heavily in favor of pro-Russia Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych. On Saturday, the Kremlin issued a statement that Russian President Vladimir Putin told U.S. President Barack Obama that Russia approved military action in Ukraine because it "reserves the right to defend its interests and the Russian-speaking people who live there."
So spare me the Putin-body-slammed-Obama prattle. This isn’t All-Star Wrestling. The fact that Putin has seized Crimea, a Russian-speaking zone of Ukraine, once part of Russia, where many of the citizens prefer to be part of Russia and where Russia has a major naval base, is not like taking Poland . I support economic and diplomatic sanctions to punish Russia for its violation of international norms and making clear that harsher sanctions, even military aid for Kiev, would ensue should Putin try to bite off more of Ukraine. But we need to remember that that little corner of the world is always going to mean more, much more, to Putin than to us, and we should refrain from making threats on which we’re not going to deliver.
And so it goes on. Unfortunately, someone in the new Ukrainian government flexes his anti-Russian muscles, and the Russian language is stripped of its official status throughout Ukraine. Fortunately, someone else sees sense and the move is cancelled. But if you were a Russian speaker, wouldn't you be rattled? Wouldn't you look around for support? Sixty per cent of Crimea's population is Russian. Suddenly, Russian troops appear in Crimea. Is it an annexation or a rescue? It depends on your point of view. Is there any evidence that Russia was behind the Crimean move to secede from Ukraine, or was it a homegrown initiative, as in 1993? The Russian Black Sea fleet had been docked on territory controlled by anti-Russians. And rumour has it that Nato is sniffing around for a new place to park its ICBMs. (But that's OK, because Nato is on our side.)
Besides, Russia is now a serious economic player, if not on the scale of China. It is not Iraq or Afghanistan or Burma, small poor countries that western governments can easily impoverish to suit their moral whims. Russia can at least reply with a degree of mayhem, as indicated in last week's leaked (and sensible) Downing Street memorandum. Germany, increasingly a point of sanity in European diplomacy, clearly opposes cutting relations with Russia over Crimea. Trade is in all of Europe's interest, and is the long-term glue most likely to reduce friction between Europe and Russia.
Rhetoric from western capitals has stepped up in recent days as the planned referendum nears. Kerry warned on Thursday that Russia could face "a series of serious steps" if Russia annexes Crimea. Before leaving Washington for London, he said the EU was planning to join the US in imposing more sanctions on Moscow if the referendum went ahead. The sanctions would include a travel ban and a freeze on bank accounts.
The referendum follows the lightning chain of events in Ukraine in recent months that included increasingly violent protests against the government, the country's pro-Russian President fleeing across the border, and then Russian troops seizing what amounts to military control of Crimea -- where Russia's Black Sea fleet is based.
Preliminary results in Sunday's referendum on whether Ukraine's Crimea region should join Russia or become an independent state show overwhelming support for Russia.
The US president, Barack Obama, told his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, on Sunday that Crimea's vote "would never be recognised" by the United States, as he and other US officials warned Moscow against making further military moves toward southern and eastern Ukraine.
The announcement came a day after the US and EU announced sanctions against several top Russian officials. Herman Van Rompuy, president of the European council, and José Manuel Barroso, head of the European commission, dismissed Putin's case for annexation and pledged a "unified European response" at the EU summit in Brussels on Thursday, following the EU's decision to impose travel bans and asset freezes on 21 Russian and Crimean figures. Van Rompuy is due to meet Putin in Moscow on Wednesday.
It's official, Crimea is Russian. In the words of Vladimir Putin, "In people's hearts and minds, Crimea has always been an inseparable part of Russia." Indeed Russia said that in Sunday's referendum 97% of its participants, mostly ethnic Russians, insisted that to belong to the Great Russia versus Small Russia (Malorossiya, another name for Ukraine) had been their dream for 60 years since the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, my great-grandfather, transferred the peninsula's jurisdiction to Kiev. 
To Russian and Syrian officials and their supporters, the Syrian war and the standoff over the Crimean Peninsula are essentially part of a single, larger battle, against post-Cold War American unilateralism. They see themselves as resisting Western conspiracies to topple inconvenient but legitimate presidents, Mr. Assad in Syria, and in Ukraine, the pro-Russian leader Viktor F. Yanukovych, whose flight in the face of street protests led to Russia’s actions in Crimea.
U.S. President Barack Obama plans to meet with leaders of the G7 group of industrialized nations this week to discuss Ukraine. 
Western countries and Japan have suspended their 16-year collaboration with Russia in the G8 group in response to the annexation of Crimea and have threatened sweeping sanctions in the event of any Russian military moves in the region.
News of the proposed changes came during Obama's trip to Europe, where he's mobilizing support for isolating Russia over its military occupation and annexation of Crimea from Ukraine.
 Interim Ukrainian President Oleksandr Turchynov ordered the withdrawal of armed forces from Crimea Monday, citing Russian threats to the lives of military staff and their families.
Russian troops have seized most of Ukraine's bases in the peninsula, including a naval base at Feodosia on Monday. Russia annexed Crimea last week after a controversial referendum that Ukraine and the West say was illegal.
On a trip to Crimea Monday, Russian Defense Minister Sergey Shoigu appointed Rear Adm. Denis Berezovsky deputy commander of the Russian Black Sea Fleet, Russia's ITAR-Tass reported.  That fleet is based in the Crimean city of Sevastopol, making it strategically important to Moscow.
Shoigu also met with former Ukrainian military personnel, who are now willing to serve in the Russian army, state news agency RIA-Novosti reported.
NATO's top military commander expressed concern Sunday about the buildup of Russian forces on Ukraine's border.
Russia said the presence of its forces complied with international agreements.  Moscow annexed Crimea after a snap referendum in the autonomous region last week that appeared to produce an overwhelming majority of votes in favor of leaving Ukraine to join Russia.
A senior U.S. defense official told CNN Russia "has enough troops that we believe they could move against Ukraine at any time now." 
The official emphasized that Washington still does not know Russia's intentions on the border, despite statements by Moscow that the troops are there for exercises. U.S. intelligence also indicates that the Russian forces are positioned to possibly go after three Ukrainian cities: Kharkiv, Luhansk and Donetsk. Russian forces have moved so close to the border, there would be no warning time, and the U.S. would likely only see an incursion as it was happening, the official said.
Ukraine's new leaders -- who took office after months of protests forced President Viktor Yanukovych, a Russian ally, from office -- as well as the United States and other Western powers say Crimea is still a part of Ukraine.
Russia insists its actions are legitimate. Crimea had belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine. The region also has a majority ethnic Russian population and other long historic ties to Russia. 
U.S. President Barack Obama arrived at The Hague on Monday for a G7 summit on threats to nuclear security. The G7 is a group of the world's seven wealthiest industrialized nations. 
Obama and other world leaders decided to end Russia's role in G8, the group of leading industrialized nations plus Russia, the White House said Monday.
Also Monday, Russia's Foreign Ministry announced it was issuing retaliatory sanctions against 13 Canadian public figures, in response to a similar move by Canada last week against Russian officials over the Crimean situation, RIA-Novosti reported.
OpRussia, a hacker group formed under the Anonymous umbrella, posted a warning to Russian President Putin that his aggression against Ukraine would not stand on March 1, 2014.
Since then, members of OpRussia have been attacking Russian business and government websites on a daily basis, including the website for the Russian Air Force, the website of the Kamchatka region, Russia's narcotics control service, and even a Russian escort service.
Russian CyberCommand is another group of hackers, some of whom are Russian, who oppose Putin's annexation of Crimea and have been relentless in their attacks against Russian businesses and agencies such as Rosoboronexport -- Russia's sole agency authorized to sell defense and dual-use products and technologies to foreign entities -- and SearchInform.ru -- a Russian IT security company that provides services to Gazprom, Skolkovo, and other important organizations.
As of March 18, Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said that Ukraine would not be seeking NATO membership, a move designed to placate Russia as well as Ukraine's large Russian-speaking population. 
The move to suspend Russia's membership in the G8 is the latest direct response from major countries allied against Russia's annexation of Crimea. 
NATO has expressed concern Russia could attempt to reclaim a region of Moldova with Russian sympathies.
While Democratic and Republican lawmakers in the United States are stepping up their calls to provide Ukraine with light arms and other military aid, administration officials have argued that sanctions put in place so far must be given time to take hold. 
With little resistance, the Russian President could easily move into eastern Ukraine even as Obama seeks to isolate Moscow in meetings with European allies. It's a possibility not lost on senior administration officials. 
"(Putin) has put all the military units he would need to move into Ukraine on its eastern border and is doing exercises. We see him moving forces in the south in a position where they could take the southern region over to Moldova," Rogers said on NBC's "Meet the Press."
President Barack Obama and congressional leaders described similar proposals Tuesday for ending the National Security Agency's sweeping collection of bulk telephone records.
The nearly simultaneous remarks demonstrated progress toward Obama's call in January for NSA changes in the aftermath of last year's classified leaks by former agency contractor Edward Snowden that revealed the magnitude of surveillance programs created in response to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
Supreme Allied Commander Europe Gen. Philip Breedlove said that Russia had a large force on Ukraine's eastern border and that he was worried it could threaten Moldova's separatist Transnistria region.
"Russia is acting much more like an adversary than a partner," Breedlove said, speaking at an event held in Brussels, Belgium, by the German Marshall Fund think tank.
Moscow has doggedly pursued its own course, even as Western leaders have denounced its actions as violations of Ukraine's sovereignty and a breach of international law.
"G8 is an informal organization that does not give out any membership cards and, by its definition, cannot remove anyone," he said during a news conference. "All the economic and financial questions are decided in G20, and G8 has the purpose of existence as the forum of dialogue between the leading Western countries and Russia. 
"If our Western partners believe that this organizational format has outlived (its usefulness), so be it."
 Ahead of Monday's G7 meeting, a representative for British Prime Minister David Cameron said Monday that no G8 meeting -- a group of the world's seven top industrial powers plus Russia -- would take place in Russia this year as previously planned.
The G7 had already suspended preparations for a planned G8 summit in the Russian city of Sochi. Monday's comment by Cameron's representative ruling the meeting out altogether comes as the West tries to increase Moscow's isolation over its actions in Ukraine.
Russia is banning the Canadian officials -- including several aides to Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper -- from entering the country, according to RIA-Novosti.
EU leaders imposed a new round of sanctions against 12 people last week, bringing the total number of people facing EU asset freezes and travel bans to 33. Canada also announced its own sanctions against Russian officials last week.
The United States announced its own new round of sanctions against 20 people and a bank that U.S. officials say is linked to Putin and senior Russian officials. Washington had already announced sanctions on 11 people.
Russia responded with its own list of sanctions against a number of U.S. lawmakers and officials.
Hackers have been busy causing service interruptions, breaching databases, and defacing hundreds of Ukrainian and Russian websites, as the crisis between the two countries plays out in cyberwarfare. 
Services like Twitter and Instagram may be used to capture events in real-time, and YouTube may be used for recruitment, training and propaganda purposes.
While the name Anonymous is frequently associated with cyberoperations that support revolutionary movements, that wasn't the case with these next two groups: Anonymous Ukraine and CyberBerkut, both of whom are Pro-Russia groups.
The group's logo and name come directly from Ukraine's old special police unit "Berkut" and there are rumors that the group is composed of either Ukrainian or Russian former security services personnel.
Some Western pundits have drawn similarities between the current cyberattacks and those that happened during previous conflicts. 
President Barack Obama and other world leaders have decided to end Russia's role in the group of leading industrialized nations, the White House said Monday.
"G8 is an informal organization that does not give out any membership cards and, by its definition, cannot remove anyone," he said during a news conference. " All the economic and financial questions are decided in G20, and G8 has the purpose of existence as the forum of dialogue between the leading Western countries and Russia."
In a nod to political and economic reforms, the United States, Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, and Italy added Russia to their group in 1998 -- transforming it from the G7 to the G8.
An aide to British Prime Minister David Cameron confirmed to CNN that a group summit initially planned for June in Sochi, Russia, where the Winter Olympics were just held, is now off.
Western powers have imposed sanctions and other penalties against specific people in Russia close to President Vladimir Putin.
A senior Obama administration official, not speaking for full attribution, said Obama and other leaders agreed that further steps to punish Russian President Vladimir Putin could include sanctions on energy, banking and defense sectors -- all areas where Europe is deeply engaged economically with Russia. 
Those additional sanctions could be prompted if Russia further escalates its incursion into Ukraine, which the official defined as sending troops beyond Crimea into the southern or eastern parts of the country. Violence in the contested peninsula could also trigger further sanctions.
The White House emphasis throughout the Russian occupation of Crimea has been "de-escalation."
Lavrov met with Kerry on Monday and said Russia's action in Crimea was necessary.
"It was the necessity to protect Russians who live there and who lived there for centuries," he said in the news conference. "And when our partners compare Crimea to Kosovo, because in Kosovo a lot of blood was shed then its independence was proclaimed. So we have a question then: Is it necessary for the blood to be shed in Crimea to agree on the right of the people in Crimea for self-determination?"
