Standing outside Donetsk's coal mine, Igor Yefremov mused over the future of Ukraine's heavy industry. "If we join the European Union our mines and factories will shut down," he said. "Already the orders from Russia are drying up. Russia doesn't want us because of the chaos in Kiev."
Tensions between Moscow and Kiev have escalated since Russia reclaimed the Crimea region after a referendum this month that overwhelmingly supported the annexation. The United States and its allies have pledged to isolate Russia for its actions.
It has been a tumultuous month for Ukraine. There has been a revolution in Kiev, the abrupt exit of the country's pro-Russian president, Viktor Yanukovych, and military occupation. Russia has seized Crimea, denounced the country's new interim government as "fascist" and launched an all-out information war to justify Crimea's annexation.
Popova may be right. There is still a demand for coal in Ukraine, even though much of the industry has crumbled. Big factories use coal, as do villagers not connected to the electricity grid. Numerous illegal surface mines known as "kopanki" also exist amid the small, depressed towns of Donbass's outer regions. The new provincial governor, local oligarch Serhiy Taruta, pledged this week to shut the kopanki down.
Donetsk was founded in the 1860s by an enterprising Welshman, John Hughes, who constructed its first steel mill. In recent febrile weeks some pro-Russian campaigners have been calling for Donetsk to follow Crimea and join Russia. More than 7,000 Ukrainians, though, have voted in a spoof online referendum for the city of 1 million to become part of another state – the United Kingdom.
Economists say that Kiev's move towards the EU will have positive and negative consequences. The EU last week abolished import tariffs for Ukrainian goods, previously at 14%. This will help Ukraine's agricultural sector, they suggest – principally businesses that export milk, cheese and sunflower oil. The EU says the deal will help trade between Moscow and Kiev.
But the news is less good for the east's traditional heavy industries, and a potential disaster for its machine-building and metallurgy businesses. Many of their exports traditionally go to Russia and other post-Soviet countries such as Kazakhstan. Steel-making factories, moreover, are heavily dependent on Russian gas supplies. Moscow has signalled that it plans to raise the price Kiev pays from $268.50 per 1,000 cubic metres – the figure Yanukovych agreed with Putin late last year – to about $400.
Since last month pro-Russian protesters have regularly gathered in the city's Lenin Square. Their key demand is federalisation – greater autonomy for the east. Another is that the new government abandons its plan for European integration. "The EU doesn't want Ukraine. And we don't want the EU. We regard the signing of the association agreement as capitulation," an IT programmer, Roman Protsenko, said. Only friendly relations with "brotherly" Russia could bring prosperity, he argued, saying that Russia, Belarus and Ukraine shared history and orthodox religion.
Others said that two decades after Ukraine became independent, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, living standards had scarcely improved, with many surviving on pathetically low wages. Sergey – a 51-year-old anti-Maidan protester – said he was unemployed and that he and his wife, Irina, survived on her salary of $200 a month. "We've put up with these conditions for 23 years," he said, adding: "Russia is like a magnet. It draws weaker states towards it."
One miner says orders from Russia are drying up. He thinks Russia does not want to deal with them because of the chaos in Kiev. Photograph: Yves Herman/Reuters
A professor of international relations, Igor Todorov, said the anti-EU mood among those struggling to get by was understandable: "The main factor here is emotion. But it's certainly true a part of Ukraine's economy is closely connected with Russia." The Kremlin, he added, had numerous economic levers it could pull to sabotage the economy and undermine Kiev. Moscow, for example, could ban Ukrainian goods, arguing that they don't meet Russian standards, Todorov said.
Speaking to the state-run newspaper Rossiskaya Gazeta, in comments first noted by the Moscow Times, Seagal described western policy on Ukraine as "idiotic". He said Putin's desire "to protect the Russian-speaking people of Crimea, his assets, and the Russian Black Sea military base in Sevastopol … [was] very reasonable".
“President Obama underscored to President Putin that the United States continues to support a diplomatic path in close consultation with the government of Ukraine and in support of the Ukrainian people with the aim of de-escalation of the crisis,” the White House said in a statement. “President Obama made clear that this remains possible only if Russia pulls back its troops and does not take any steps to further violate Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.”
The US has called on Russia to disarm irregular forces in Crimea, admit international observers and pull its troops back from the eastern border. But speaking to Russian state television before the talks, Lavrov laid out Moscow's own quite different terms for a deal. Primarily, he said, Russia was seeking a federal solution for Ukraine as part of "deep constitutional reform".
The Russian has drawn international condemnation over his support for Syria's Bashar al-Assad and annexation of the Crimean region of Ukraine.
President Vladimir V. Putin signed a decree raising pensions and another increasing salaries for public sector workers like teachers and doctors, according to a statement posted on the Kremlin’s website. Officials also announced a number of new investment plans and tax breaks for Crimea, which Russia seized from Ukraine two weeks ago after a rushed vote in the Crimean Legislature. The Crimeans even realigned the clock, moving theirs ahead two hours, to be identical with Moscow’s time zone.
France also helped spearhead the EU’s economic sanctions on Russia over the seizure of Crimea and Russian backing for insurgents in the east of the former Soviet republic. Putin’s Versailles visit meant Macron was the first western leader to speak to Putin following the G7 summit this weekend, where western leaders agreed to consider new measures against Moscow if the situation in Ukraine did not improve.
In Catalonia too, Russian bots and their fake news output were pushing on a door that was already swinging open because of other circumstances. The Catalan leaders, unlike those in the US, France, and the UK have shown little interest so far in reciprocating Moscow’s embrace.
As with Assange, Casaleggio’s distaste for the overbearing state does not apply to Moscow. The common fight against US, Nato and the rest of the western world’s liberal order is what has taken primacy.
The meeting of minds is embodied in the man long seen as Trump’s chief ideologue, Steve Bannon. Bannon is another western libertarian for whom the contradiction between opposing restrictions on individual liberties at home and backing Russian authoritarianism is subsumed beneath an admiration for Putin’s muscular nationalism.
In the summer of 2014, Bannon explained the attraction of the Russian leader for “traditionalists”, to a meeting of conservative Catholics through a Skype link to the Vatican.
For Farage too, reverence for Putin’s boldness on the world stage has outweighed doubts about his repressive rule. Asked in a 2014 GQ magazine interview, which world leader he most admired, he said: “As an operator, but not as a human being, I would say Putin.
However, the long-term corrosive effect of Russia’s use of disinformation to break down trust in western institutions is hard to measure and may be unmeasurable. What is clear is that it is continuing with the active assistance of political movements who trade in disillusion and resentment, and who have found a natural home on the internet.
In all cases, libertarians viscerally opposed to centralised power made common cause with a brutally autocratic state apparatus in Moscow, an American plutocrat with a deeply murky financial record, and the instinctively authoritarian far right. All in the name of disruption of government and liberal norms in western democracies.
That meant some odd bedfellows could become useful allies. “They have been able to forge a very convenient marriage with other enemies of liberal democracy,” said Bartlett, “who are in every other sense imaginable completely at odds with each other, but they do share that common hatred of establishment, western, soft, democratic politics as they see it.”
But there are plenty of other examples of the mutual embrace between Moscow and western libertarianism. In particular, the libertarians share with Moscow a profound distaste for the European Union, which they see as a continent-wide epitome of centralisation, and of liberal social norms.
Assange also gave his backing to the Brexit vote in the UK, an intervention which again does not appear to be merely incidental. It earned him an unannounced visit in March from Nigel Farage, the Brexit leader and Trump’s closest British ally. When doorstopped on his way out of the Ecuadorian embassy, Farage claimed he could not remember why he had gone there.
He turned against his employers in the US security apparatus, and stole their secrets in the name of transparency and the citizen’s right to privacy, but his defection has left him in exile in Moscow, at the mercy of a government that hardly even pretends to observe such western niceties.
They’re completely at odds with each other in every other sense but share a hatred of establishment western politics Jamie Bartlett, Demos
