South Korea’s government said on Tuesday it would propose a supplementary budget shield of around 10 trillion won ($8.44bn), with Brexit turmoil as well as domestic risks seen as weighing on its decision-making.
Addressing the Catalan parliament on Tuesday evening, Puigdemont said that, while the referendum earlier this month had given his government a mandate to create a sovereign republic, he would not immediately push ahead with independence from Spain.
As stock markets and the pound continued to decline, Cameron insisted the British economy was robust and could withstand the shockwaves created by the result.
Hours after he spoke Standard & Poor’s knocked the UK’s sovereign rating by two notches, from AAA to AA, saying an exit would lead to a “less predictable, stable and effective policy framework in the UK”.
Cameron, who is resigning as prime minister over the EU referendum outcome, will travel to Brussels on Tuesday to discuss the Brexit vote with Europe’s leaders.
“Given the scale of planned investment, even a moderate change of [0.5%] to the cost of financing, sustained for multiple years, would raise costs significantly, possibly in the order of hundreds of millions of pounds,” the research stated. “Further upwards pressure on costs would result from the likely devaluation of the pound, given the role imported goods and services play in UK energy supply.”
“Thousands and thousands of jobs will be lost as a result of this. Thousands of jobs that would have been created will be lost and the knock-on effect will be so dire.
Earlier in the week, Branson, who campaigned for the UK to remain in the EU, called on the government to consider holding a second referendum, “based on the misrepresentations made by the leave campaign”.
About three-quarters of lawmakers had supported remaining in the European Union. A senior Conservative lawmaker, Kenneth Clarke, suggested that Parliament could override the referendum — which is not, in the end, legally binding on the government — while a Labour legislator, David Lammy, called for a second referendum.
Alex Salmond, a member of Parliament and a former leader of the Scottish National Party, blamed the British government for the political vacuum, saying that neither Mr. Cameron nor Mr. Johnson had taken ownership of the mess. “If you break it, you own it,” he said.
A decision on the timetable is expected by Wednesday, amid increased speculation that Britain could have a general election this year, after giving the Conservatives a five-year term in May 2015.
Of European parliament members: "They don't like me. It's mutual," he says
Fresh off the boos and turned backs that greeted his appearance at the European Council earlier in the day, Farage said warnings of economic chaos following the vote won't come to pass, but suggested even if they do, it would be worth it.
Farage, a member of the European parliament since 1999, derided his fellow members who booed him Tuesday when he spoke at the Council meeting in Brussels, the first since U.K. voters approved the exit referendum.
"It's very clear that the country is going to be poorer as a result of what's happening to the economy," Osborne told the BBC on Tuesday.
The chancellor of the exchequer said ahead of the vote that an emergency budget would be needed to fill a "black hole" of about £30 billion ($42.6 billion) per year if the U.K. left the EU.
Economists have slashed their growth forecasts for this year, and next, with some even predicting a recession.
A Virgin spokesperson said the group had been looking to buy a company employing 3,000 people, but the deal would now not go ahead.
Nearly 4 million people have signed a petition calling for a new referendum. Parliament should consider it, Branson said.
It's now even cheaper to get a mortgage.
Low inventory and high demand have pushed up home prices throughout the country, creating an affordability issue.
Home prices increased 5% in April from the year prior, according to the latest S&P/Case-Shiller National Home Price Index released earlier this week.
SNP conference: Nicola Sturgeon makes keynote address - Politics live Read more
Seizing on a policy pushed by Scottish Labour, the first minister said power from the publicly owned energy company would be sold as cheaply as possible.
Carles Puigdemont, the Catalan President, declared that the region had "earned the right" to independence from Madrid. But he told the Catalan parliament in Barcelona that he wanted to take the heat out of the political standoff that has roiled Spain since a disputed referendum on October 1.
“During the referendum campaign, I said I want my country back,” Mr. Farage said on Monday. “What I’m saying today is I want my life back, and it begins right now.”
May had also wanted the UK to leave the European Convention on Human Rights, but has now dropped the idea with Parliament unlikely to support it.
“This suggests the tug-a-war between more central bank support and economic fundamentals is going to increase, driving market volatility.”
Related: Italian bank crisis may be collateral damage from Brexit
The British referendum on June 23 plunged the European Union into crisis. It left Britain rudderless as the pound sank in value and both the governing and opposition parties engaged in fierce and acrimonious leadership battles. Mr. Cameron, who had supported remaining in the European Union, said after the referendum that he would resign once the governing Conservatives selected a new leader, a process that he had expected to last until September but that was drastically accelerated on Monday.
The Irish government must act to guarantee the progress made by the Good Friday Agreement and subsequent accords. Ireland’s prime minister, Enda Kenny, supports my proposal for an All-Ireland forum of political parties and civic partners to deal with the consequences of Brexit. We need maximum coordination among those who support the democratic demand that the North remain in the European Union.
Despite being part of the Remain camp in the run-up to the referendum, May will push ahead with the UK's divorce from Europe -- "Brexit means Brexit," she said in typically no-nonsense style.
Looking ahead over the next three months, 26% more Rics members expected sales to drop further than expected a busier housing market. “This is the most negative reading for near-term expectations since 1998,” Rics said.
The IMF, which voiced strong misgivings about a vote for Brexit before the EU referendum, said it expected the UK economy to grow by 1.3% in 2017, 0.9 percentage points lower than an estimate made in its World Economic Outlook (WEO), in April.
The report follows a clutch of business surveys this week suggesting the vote to leave the EU could derail Britain’s economy following relatively strong economic growth in the run-up to the referendum. GDP was revealed to be up 0.6% in the second quarter, greater than the 0.4% growth seen in the previous three months, but more timely indicators pointed to falling confidence among car factories, high street stores and in the construction industry.
The company’s share price, which had fallen sharply from 528p on the day of the EU referendum, was up by about 1.5% on Friday morning, at 416p.
Britain’s decision to leave the EU has triggered a sharp fall in the value of the pound versus the dollar and the euro, making it more expensive for Britons to travel abroad. It has also caused a slump in consumer confidence. The latest poll from market researcher GfK recorded the biggest slide in sentiment for more than 26 years in July.
IAG posted an operating profit before one-off items of €555m in the second quarter, up from €530m a year earlier, but less than the €562m predicted by analysts. The group took a currency hit of €148m in the quarter, mainly due to the weak pound, as it reports results in euros. Traditionally, the second quarter is the most profitable part of the year.
The company has scaled back expansion plans for the next six months and is reviewing ideas for capacity growth and spending next year.
