On the one hand, this was expected. We know that mass bends space and time, and so when mass moves it really should cause ripples in space and time, in much the same way that a gymnast moving on the surface of a trampoline causes ripples in the cloth.
When you drop your toy dog and it falls to the floor, that’s gravity pulling it down, the gravity of the Earth. You can’t see it, you can’t feel it, but it’s there. In the universe far away, black holes have a lot more gravity than the Earth’s. The gravity is so strong that even light, like from your flashlight, falls in it and can’t get out. And these black holes move around a lot in space. When they crash into each other, they send out huge waves that tell the universe what just happened.
The phenomenon detected was the collision of two black holes. Using the world’s most sophisticated detector, the scientists listened for 20 thousandths of a second as the two giant black holes, one 35 times the mass of the sun, the other slightly smaller, circled around each other.
Thursday’s announcement was the unequivocal first detection ever of gravity waves. The hope is that gravity wave astronomy could start to answer questions not just about the life of stars but their deaths as well: death by collision, death in a black hole, death in some rare stellar catastrophe so fierce that, for a few thousandths of a second, the blast is the brightest thing in the universe.
“The colliding black holes that produced these gravitational waves created a violent storm in the fabric of space and time, a storm in which time speeded up and slowed down, and speeded up again, a storm in which the shape of space was bent in this way and that way,” he said.
Not only had the detector picked up the collision of two enormous black holes across a distance of almost a billion light years of space, it recorded the distinctive “chirp” as the two spiralled towards each other.
The discovery, he said, completes a scientific arc of wonder that began 200 years ago, when the great British scientist Michael Faraday began to puzzle about how action was transmitted across the distance of space; how the sun pulled the Earth around. If the sun moved 10 yards, very suddenly, would the Earth feel the difference?
He reasoned that something must cross space to transmit the force of gravity. Faraday’s reasoning inspired the great British mathematician James Clerk Maxwell to think about how an electric force travelled, and arrive at an understanding of light and a prediction of radio waves.
“Einstein, when he came to write down his theory of gravity, his two heroes were Faraday and Maxwell,” said Turok. “He tried to write down laws of the gravitational field and he wasn’t in the least surprised to discover that his predictions had waves, gravitational waves.”
The gravitational waves -- ripples in space-time -- were created by the merging of two black holes, Reitze said. One black hole had the mass of 29 suns; the other was the equivalent of 36 suns. Each was perhaps 50 kilometers (30 miles) in diameter.
More than a billion years ago -- LIGO estimates about 1.3 billion -- the two collided at half the speed of light. Gravitational waves pass through everything, so the result traveled through the universe for that time before reaching Earth.
The 'chirp' of black holes colliding
The gravitational waves stretched and compressed space around Earth "like Jell-O," said Reitze.
Szabolcs Marka, a physicist at Columbia University who is leader of the LIGO member Columbia Experimental Gravity Group, said you could think of it as "a cosmic microphone."
Black holes are a holy grail of the gravitational wave concept. To date, we'd been able only to see their aftereffects. Black holes themselves were a conjecture.
"There's been a lot of indirect evidence for their existence," says Shoemaker, an expert in black holes. "But this is the first time we actually detect two black holes merging and we know the only thing that predicts that (is) gravitational radiation, (which) comes from a binary black hole merging. There's no other way we could have seen that but gravitationally."
'Now we can listen to the universe'
Physicists believe some kind of dark matter exists because astronomers can detect the gravitational pull it exerts on stars and galaxies. But dark matter itself is not only invisible, it has never been detected directly or indirectly by other means. Scientists have suggested that dark matter comprises “weakly interacting massive particles” (Wimps), leftover material from the big bang that pass through normal matter and leave no trace but in gravity.
Baker agrees. “Capturing these general relativistic effects is important because as our telescope technology is improves, so does the accuracy of our astronomical data. They may be only small corrections to the Newtonian predictions, but we should include them to make totally rigorous calculations for the next generation of telescopes.” She adds: “Also they have a bearing on ruling out models of dark matter and dark energy, arguably the biggest problems in current cosmology.”The Dark Side of the Universe Read more
While many models of the universe currently exist, simulations are typically based on those built on Newton’s theory of gravity. The new tool, however, is based on Einstein’s theory of general relativity, allowing scientists to create computer simulations based on a far wider range of models. Dr Julian Adamek, one of the paper’s authors now based at the Observatoire de Paris in Meudon, says that offers exciting possibilities. “You can see now a simulation of how spacetime is dragged around - the ‘frame-dragging’ effect - by the movement of matter and also how gravitational waves would be generated by the matter which moves around,” he says.
Published in the journal Nature Physics, the paper, led by scientists at the University of Geneva, also points out that the tool will allow researchers to delve deeper into the nature of dark energy - the mysterious phenomenon responsible for the acceleration of the expansion of the universe. While dark energy is often given a value known as the cosmological constant, Adamek is quick to add that it is still an enigma. “If it is not [described by the cosmological constant], if it is something else, you need to know what kind of implications [it would] have and for this, simulations would be a nice way,” says Adamek.
