More than 270 people are still unaccounted for as efforts continue to rescue passengers aboard a South Korean ferry that sank off the country’s south-west coast on Wednesday morning.
The charges against Lee appear to shed some light on what authorities have focused on in their efforts to find out what happened to the ferry making its way Wednesday from Incheon to the resort island of Jeju. It sank in frigid waters 20 kilometers (roughly 12 miles) off the coast of South Korea's southern peninsula.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest South Korean coastguards on the rescue operation around the stricken passenger ferry Sewol on Wednesday. Photograph: Yonhap/EPA
The Sewol, a car and passenger ferry, sent out a distress signal shortly before 9am local time. The 6,852-tonne vessel had been en route from the western port of Incheon to the southern resort island of Jeju, located about 100 kilometres (60 miles) off the mainland, when it reportedly hit rocks and began listing severely.
The area had been shrouded in fog overnight, leading to the cancellation of many ferry services to islands. But news reports said visibility in the area was fair on Wednesday morning.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Coastguards rescuing passengers and crew aboard the South Korean ferry Sewol which sank on Wednesday on its way to Jeju island from Incheon. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images
Passenger testimony indicated that the ship had struck rocks about 20 km off the coast of Byungpoong island.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest An injured passenger is stretchered by rescue personnel after ferry Sewol sank in waters off South Korea on Wednesday. Photograph: Yonhap/EPA
The pupils, from Danwon high school in Ansan city near Seoul, were on their way to Jeju, a popular tourist destination, for a four-day study trip. The ship left Incheon port on Tuesday evening, according to
local maritime officials, and was due to arrive at Jeju later on Wednesday.
Survivors of Wednesday's ferry accident off the coast of South Korea have described chaotic scenes after the vessel listed and started to sink, possibly after running aground, forcing petrified passengers to jump into the sea before it disappeared beneath the water.
Other survivors said they feared the death toll would rise significantly as they believed dozens of people were still trapped inside the ferry after it listed and then sank into the sea about 20km (12 miles) from the coast of Byungpoong island about two hours after issuing a distress signal.
The chances of surviving for long in the sea were slim. The temperature in the sea separating the South Korean mainland from a string of islands off its south-west coast was about 12C on Wednesday – cold enough to bring on symptoms of hypothermia after 90 minutes to two hours, according to a rescue worker quoted by Associated Press.
The pupils and their teachers, from Danwon high school in the Seoul suburb of Ansan, were travelling to Jeju island for a four-day study trip, along with about 150 other passengers, when the accident occurred.
The Sewol sent out a distress signal shortly before 9am local time. The 6,825-ton vessel had been en route from the western port of Incheon to Jeju, located about 100km (60 miles) off the mainland, when it reportedly hit rocks and began listing severely.
Another high school student who survived reported that a crew member named Park Ji-young, 22, had helped teenagers to get life jackets and escape by urging them to jump into the frigid waters of the Yellow Sea where rescue boats were waiting. She stayed behind without a life jacket for herself despite the youngsters’ entreaties to jump with them. “After saving you, I will get out,” she said. “The crew goes out last.”
"Please notify the coast guard. Our ship is in danger. The ship is rolling right now," a crew member on the ship first tells authorities in a dramatic conversation that took place while the Sewol ferry was sinking last week. 
Among other things, authorities have questioned why an inexperienced third mate was guiding the ship at the time of the accident, why so few of the ferry's life rafts were deployed and why crew members ordered passengers to don life vests and stay put.
What they didn't know was the passengers, including the 325 students from Danwon High School on a field trip, had been told by the ferry's crew to stay put. While the ferry continued its inexorable descent into the cold waters of the Yellow Sea, those on board trusted in the orders of their crew.
SEOUL, South Korea — As a ferry carrying 476 people was badly listing off the southwestern coast of South Korea two weeks ago, one of the students on board asked, “Are we becoming a Titanic?”
The young passengers were among 325 second-year high school students on board the 6,825-ton ferry, which sank on April 16. After Su-hyeon, 17, was found dead, the police returned the boy’s recovered personal items to his family, who discovered the video on his phone. This week, his father, Park Jong-dae, released the video to the local news media, saying that South Koreans must watch it to learn what went wrong.
Among the text messages, photos and video clips that have been produced by passengers of the ill-fated ship, Su-hyeon’s 15-minute footage bears the most dramatic witness to the panic and fear, as well as youthful naïveté and optimism, of the students trapped inside the ship while many of the crew members, including the captain, were among the first to desert their vessel.
At 8:55, while the ship’s crew sent its first distress signal, one student in the cabin below shouted, “We don’t want to die!”
“What? Hurry! Save us!” a student shrieked. Another wondered, “Are we going to die?” A minute later, as the ship listed further, some students suggested donning life jackets. An announcement over the intercom again instructed passengers to stay where they were.
In videos recovered from the cellphones of passengers aboard the ferry Sewol, a voice can be heard over the ship’s intercom urging students and their teachers to stay put, telling them they are safer where they are. But as the ship continued to tip and the voice over the intercom repeated the same instructions, panic spread. Some passengers apparently sensed the approaching doom, and sent farewells to their families.
As of Wednesday, 210 people were confirmed dead, with 92 still missing. Of the dead or missing, 250 were students on a school trip to a resort island.
As students felt the ship shuddering and wondered whether it was sinking, a crew member came onto the intercom, urging students to stay put.
Over the intercom, the students were again urged not to move and to hold onto what they could. The ship’s captain and crew members later told reporters and investigators that they had thought it was safer for the passengers to stay in their cabins than to move in a panicked mass, causing the ship to list faster, or for them to jump into cold waters when the rescue ships were still far away.
At 8:57, as another announcement from the crew advised “please never move,” one student said: “Should I call Mom? Mom, this looks like the end of me.”
