The price of wheat for delivery in May rose by as much as 5.9% to $6.38 (£3.81) a bushel on the Chicago Board of Trade – the biggest intraday rise for almost 18 months. Corn for delivery in May rose by up to 3.7% to a six-month high of $4.81.
"These visits will be an opportunity to forge a strong working relationship that we can build upon and which I hope to develop with more leaders across the European Union in the weeks and months ahead," May said in a statement Wednesday.
Corn prices rose last week in Ukraine as farmers held back grain to protect themselves against the country's falling currency.
About 85% of wheat milled in the UK is home-grown and the rest comes mainly from the European Union and Canada. Much of Ukraine's supply goes to the Middle East and north Africa, and it is a bigger supplier of corn than of wheat.
Gordon Polson, director of the Federation of Bakers, said short-term market price rises would have little immediate impact on the cost of a loaf.
"If it's a sustained and large increase in price, which it isn't at this point, then Ukraine could have an impact but bear in mind that prices are still lower than at the end of 2012," Watts said.Lenovo, the world’s biggest maker of personal computers, has said it is considering price increases in reaction to sterling’s fall.
The Chinese company’s chief financial officer, Wai Ming Wong, said on Wednesday: “To the extent that we need to pass things on to the customer, we will.” He said Lenovo would also look for other ways to deal with the cost of the falling pound.
Most computer components are sold in dollars and the pound’s plunge against the US currency has made them more expensive to buy. Other computer makers are likely to increase UK prices following the pound’s fall to 31-year lows this week – a drop of more than 10% since the referendum.
“The recent strengthening of the US dollar versus sterling and other currencies … following the UK’s decision to leave the European Union, will have a direct impact on the price we sell to our UK [business] customers and partners.
“The exact price change will vary across our portfolio, and consumer products are currently not affected,” Dell said in a statement. Dell has ordered a 10% increase in prices, according to the Register website.
The price of cocoa traded in London rose to its highest in almost 40 years on Wednesday in reaction to the pound’s fall. Analysts said the 1.5% jump to £2,495 a tonne, which has eased slightly since, was purely driven by currency movements.
Smartphone maker OnePlus said it would raise the price of its OnePlus 3 model from £309 to £329 from 11 July, also attributing the hike to the post-Brexit vote fall in the pound.
Theresa May’s new administration has received a significant boost from a Bank of England report showing that the economy has been resilient in the first few weeks since the Brexit vote and displays no general signs of slowing down.
Even so, City analysts said the Bank was still likely to announce fresh stimulus measures for the economy next month in anticipation that the better-than-expected economic news since the referendum would not last.
The agents’ report was released at the same time as the Office for National Statistics reported that the labour market remained solid in the period from March to May, the first three months of the referendum campaign, with the jobless rate falling to its lowest level in more than a decade.
The chancellor, Philip Hammond, said the figures were “proof that the fundamentals of the British economy are strong”. He added: “As the economy adjusts to the effect of the referendum decision, it is doing so from a position of economic strength.”
“The outlook for investment was uncertain,” the report said. “The majority of firms spoken with did not expect a near-term impact from the referendum result on their capital spending. But around one third expected some negative effects over the next twelve months, with reports of a ‘risk off’ approach to expenditures and some imminent plans for spending slipping.”
The Bank’s findings were backed up by the latest trading report from the retailer John Lewis. It said spending in its department stores and at its Waitrose supermarkets were 3.2% higher in the week ending 16 July than they had been in the same week of 2015.
According to the ONS, there were 31.7 million people in work in the three months ending in May, 176,000 more than for the three months to February 2016 and 624,000 more than for a year earlier.
The government’s preferred measure of unemployment, the internationally agreed measure that looks at those without a job but seeking and available to work, fell by 54,000 in the three months ending in May to its lowest level since early 2008, when the economy was in the early stages of recession.
The ONS said the unemployment rate had edged down from 5% to 4.9% and was last lower in the July to September period of 2005.London (CNN) Theresa May is meeting with German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin Wednesday on her first international trip as Britain's Prime Minister, for talks that she hopes will help smooth Brexit negotiations.
Speaking at a press conference alongside May ahead of the working dinner between two of the world's most powerful women, Merkel said that Britain and Germany had friendly relations and shared values.
Bilateral relationships and trade between them would continue after Britain's departure from the European Union, she said.
She said the business of negotiating Britain's exit from the bloc would take time and "require serious and detailed work."
"I want to work with Chancellor Merkel and my colleagues around the European Council in a constructive spirit to make this a sensible and orderly departure," she said.
"All of us will need time to prepare for these negotiations and the United Kingdom will not invoke Article 50 until our objectives are clear. And that's why I've said already, this will not happen before the end of this year."
She said that she understood that the delayed triggering of the article "will not please everyone."
The EU referendum campaign was marked by a lot of claims about what would or wouldn’t happen after the vote. What is clear is that the decision to leave the union will have far-reaching consequences for all areas of British society and the economy for years to come.
November will be the first time we see unemployment figures fully calculated post-referendum, comparing July, August and September 2016 with the months prior to the vote.
The first estimate of Q3 GDP figures that will cover July-September, will not be available until late October. That’s when we will start to know if the leave vote has tipped the economy into recession. The Bank of England didn’t think that had happened, which contrasts with Friday’s Markit survey, but there were already signs the economy was slowing down before the referendum.
In the year ending 2015, net migration stood at 333,000. The next figures are due in August, but will only include migration statistics up to March. The February 2017 ONS release will be the first to include migration changes post-referendum.
The newly set up Department for Exiting the European Union won’t come for free. In PMQs this week, Tim Farron asked about reports that the department would be hiring lawyers “at a cost of £5,000 per head per day”.
The IMF predicts the UK economy will grow 1.7% in 2017, 0.9 percentage points lower than it estimated in April. But if the referendum campaign has taught us anything, it is that predictions about what would happen after a leave vote were tricky to get right.The prime minister, Theresa May, appears to have indicated that the UK will not invoke article 50 this year. There is currently a case before the high court arguing over who has the actual power to invoke article 50.
When will the UK actually leave the EU?
The warnings of the economic consequences of the vote have been modified since it took place. It hasn’t been the baptism of fire that many expected for the new chancellor. Nevertheless, there is still concern from global financial institutions about the impact of Brexit on the world economy.
What might happen next
