More than 270 people are still unaccounted for as efforts continue to rescue passengers aboard a South Korean ferry that sank off the country’s south-west coast on Wednesday morning.
The news of Lee Joon Seok's arrest in connection with the sinking that left at least 29 people dead and more than 270 missing came as divers made their way to the third deck inside the wreckage where they found three bodies, according to the South Korean coast guard. 
A total of 277 people remained missing.
Authorities said the dead included a female crew member in her early 20 and two male high school students. A coast guard officer confirmed a fourth fatality but had no immediate details about it.
Other reports said passengers had been told to put on lifejackets and jump into the sea amid fears that the vessel was on the verge of sinking. News footage showed that at least one lifeboat aboard the ferry had been deployed.
The chances of surviving for long in the sea were slim. The temperature in the sea separating the South Korean mainland from a string of islands off its south-west coast was about 12C on Wednesday – cold enough to bring on symptoms of hypothermia after 90 minutes to two hours, according to a rescue worker quoted by Associated Press.
The death toll in the South Korean accident stood at 58 as of Sunday, with 244 missing.
At least 64 people have died in the sinking, and 238 are missing, the South Korean coast guard said Monday. 
"There should have been crewmembers going to the life raft stations. There should have been crew members mustering the passengers. So you know your head count. If there are missing people, there should have been other crew members searching the vessel to find those people."
What they didn't know was the passengers, including the 325 students from Danwon High School on a field trip, had been told by the ferry's crew to stay put. While the ferry continued its inexorable descent into the cold waters of the Yellow Sea, those on board trusted in the orders of their crew.
The young passengers were among 325 second-year high school students on board the 6,825-ton ferry, which sank on April 16. After Su-hyeon, 17, was found dead, the police returned the boy’s recovered personal items to his family, who discovered the video on his phone. This week, his father, Park Jong-dae, released the video to the local news media, saying that South Koreans must watch it to learn what went wrong.
In videos recovered from the cellphones of passengers aboard the ferry Sewol, a voice can be heard over the ship’s intercom urging students and their teachers to stay put, telling them they are safer where they are. But as the ship continued to tip and the voice over the intercom repeated the same instructions, panic spread. Some passengers apparently sensed the approaching doom, and sent farewells to their families.
As of Wednesday, 210 people were confirmed dead, with 92 still missing. Of the dead or missing, 250 were students on a school trip to a resort island.
Among the text messages, photos and video clips that have been produced by passengers of the ill-fated ship, Su-hyeon’s 15-minute footage bears the most dramatic witness to the panic and fear, as well as youthful naïveté and optimism, of the students trapped inside the ship while many of the crew members, including the captain, were among the first to desert their vessel.
As students felt the ship shuddering and wondered whether it was sinking, a crew member came onto the intercom, urging students to stay put.
Over the intercom, the students were again urged not to move and to hold onto what they could. The ship’s captain and crew members later told reporters and investigators that they had thought it was safer for the passengers to stay in their cabins than to move in a panicked mass, causing the ship to list faster, or for them to jump into cold waters when the rescue ships were still far away.
