The Pentagon is to present options to Donald Trump for a military strike on Bashar al-Assad after outrage over the latest chemical weapons attack in Idlib appears to have prompted a change of heart about the Syrian president.
Then, on Tuesday, the Syrian air force bombed Khan Sheikhun town, killing dozens of people with the nerve agent sarin. Two days later the US president, Donald Trump, authorised missile strikes on the Syrian airbase where he said chemical weapons had been loaded.
'The dead were wherever you looked': inside Syrian town after chemical attack Read more
Tillerson alluded to US intelligence, which Trump has in the past publicly distrusted, leaving no doubt of Assad’s culpability for a sarin gas attack in Idlib that killed more than 80 people, including children.
Vladimir Putin has doubled down on his support for the Syrian government despite the release of postmortem results by Turkey that confirmed chemical weapons were used in an attack that killed at least 72 people in north Syria.
'The dead were wherever you looked': inside Syrian town after chemical attack Read more
Later Turkey’s health ministry said 31 people injured in the attack who had been taken across the border showed signs of being exposed to the nerve agent sarin.
The medical results from Turkey came as the Syrian foreign minister denied his government used chemical weapons in the attack. He also denied Syria had ever used them, even though reports from UN investigators have confirmed previous chemical attacks by both the Syrian government and Islamic State forces.
Speaking to reporters in Damascus, Walid al-Muallem said: “The Syrian Arab Army has never used chemical weapons and will not use chemical weapons against Syrians and even against terrorists.”
Rescue workers have gathered soil samples from the scene of the attack and sent them to western intelligence officials to determine precisely what nerve agent was used.
Witnesses said at least one Syrian warplane dropped bombs on Khan Sheikhun at about 6.30am on Tuesday. Shortly afterwards, first responders were overwhelmed with patients suffering from acute breathing problems, foaming at the mouth and writhing in pain.Khan Sheikhun is a ghost town, its streets deserted and silent as though mourning the victims of the atrocity that occurred here two days earlier.
The only reminder of what happened is a small, blackened, crater near the northern part of town, where a rocket laced with a nerve agent fell, killing more than 70 people in one of the worst mass casualty chemical attacks in the six-year war in Syria.
The victims’ symptoms are consistent with sarin, the nerve agent that was dropped on an opposition-held area near Damascus in 2013, killing more than 1,000 people. After that attack the regime supposedly gave up its chemical weapons arsenal.
Moscow, Bashar al-Assad’s principal backer in the war, said the Syrian government had bombed a rebel-run toxic gas manufacturing plant in Khan Sheikhun, and that the gas had subsequently leaked out.
There was no evidence of any building being hit in recent days or weeks near where so many people were killed and wounded by a nerve agent. The homes across the street appeared undamaged from the outside. There was no contamination zone near any building. Instead, the contamination area radiated from a hole in a road.
“It was like Judgment Day,” said Hamid Khutainy, a civil defence volunteer in Khan Sheikhun.
How this all came to be remains murky two days later, much like the waters surrounding the capsized ship.
The US military has launched a cruise missile attack on a Syrian airfield in response to Bashar al-Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons this week, marking the first time the US has become a direct combatant against the Syrian regime.
Donald Trump launches 60 missiles in US strike after Syria chemical attack – live Read more
Syrian officials said at least seven people were killed and nine wounded in US missile attack.
Donald Trump, who for years signalled he was comfortable with Assad remaining in power, abruptly switched course after seeing images of children gassed to death in Idlib province after Assad used chemical weapons against Syrian civilians.
Russian state TV aired footage claiming to show the damage from the US strikes at the Syrian airbase. It showed craters and pockmarks left by explosions and said nine Syrian air force jets had been destroyed.
'The dead were wherever you looked': inside Syrian town after chemical attack Read more
Vladimir Putin’s spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said in a statement carried by Russian news agencies that the president believed the US had carried out the strikes under a “far-fetched pretext”. Russia has argued that the death of civilians in Khan Sheikhun resulted from Syrian forces hitting a rebel chemical arsenal there, but the Guardian visited the attack site and found no evidence for this claim.
Dozens of civilians, including 10 children, were killed, apparently by a chemical attack on Khan Sheikhun, in a region held by rebels who oppose Assad’s regime.
On Friday, sources told the Guardian US intelligence officials believed Russian personnel were at Shayrat airbase when the chemical agent was loaded on to a Syrian jet. They have not established whether the Russians knew it was happening.
In 2013, Assad’s forces used chemical weapons, including sarin and chlorine, killing more than 1,000 people. President Barack Obama threatened military action over Assad’s use of sarin, an illegal weapon, but the US Congress balked and Russia intervened to make a deal in which Assad would hand over stockpiles of weapons.
“We are assessing the results of the strike,” Davis said. “Initial indications are that this strike has severely damaged or destroyed Syrian aircraft and support infrastructure and equipment at Shayrat airfield, reducing the Syrian government’s ability to deliver chemical weapons.”
Davis said the airbase had been used to store chemical weapons used by the regime until 2013, when a deal was struck with the US and Russia to remove its declared arsenal. He said it was used to deliver the chemical weapons dropped on Khan Sheikhun, but could not confirm whether any chemical weapons were still at the site. However, he stressed that the targets were chosen carefully to avoid the risk of hitting those weapons.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Syrians bury the bodies of victims of a chemical weapons attack in Khan Sheikhun. Photograph: Fadi Al-Halabi/AFP/Getty Images
For years, Trump rejected any attack on Assad as a strategic folly, despite repeated chemical assaults of the sort that prompted Thursday’s missile strikes. After Russia’s intervention in the conflict, Trump said rival Hillary Clinton’s openness to strikes against Assad’s forces were inviting conflict with Russia. Just days ago, his secretary of state and UN ambassador made statements indicating Trump was prepared to let Assad – who in November called Trump a “natural ally” – remain in power.
“We are assessing the results of the strike,” Captain Davis added. “Initial indications are that this strike has severely damaged or destroyed Syrian aircraft and support infrastructure and equipment at Shayrat airfield, reducing the Syrian government’s ability to deliver chemical weapons.”
Mr. McMaster said the missile strikes would not eliminate Mr. Assad’s ability to use chemical weapons, but would degrade it. He said the United States military had specifically sought to avoid hitting what it believes is a facility containing more sarin gas at the airfield.
The Pentagon on Thursday night released a graphic showing the flight track of Syrian aircraft as they left the Shayrat field on Tuesday and carried out the chemical attack in the town of Khan Sheikhoun in Idlib Province.
Two Republican senators, John McCain of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, praised the strike in a statement and called for Mr. Trump to go further: to “take Assad’s air force — which is responsible not just for the latest chemical weapons attack, but countless atrocities against the Syrian people — completely out of the fight.”
His voice remained hoarse on the telephone two days later.Western governments accused the Syrian military of carrying out that attack, in August 2013, in which sarin was identified as the poison. It led President Barack Obama to threaten a direct military intervention in the conflict — an option he abandoned when Mr. Assad agreed to sign the chemical weapons ban.
“If the Syrian regime knew that there were chemical weapons in the warehouse, it should have also known that it should not have attacked it,” he said.
“The use of chemical weapons is absolutely inadmissible,” Mr. Peskov said, adding that the Syrian Army must act to “prevent any chemical agents that can be used as weapons from falling into the terrorists’ hands.”
(CNN) Hillary Clinton called on the United States to take out Syrian leader Bashar al-Assad's Air Force on Thursday, days after a chemical attack killed more than 70 people in the war-torn country.
"Assad has an air force, and that air force is the cause of most of these civilian deaths as we have seen over the years and as we saw again in the last few days," Clinton said in a speech at the "Women in the World" summit in New York City. "And I really believe that we should have and still should take out his air fields and prevent him from being able to use them to bomb innocent people and drop sarin gas on them."
JUST WATCHED Turkey: Syrian autopsies show sarin gas Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Turkey: Syrian autopsies show sarin gas 01:50
US officials said Assad perpetrated the chemical attack this week that killed more than 70 people.
He arrived here at the Reyhanli State Hospital 24 hours ago, one of around 30 Syrians rushed to this southern Turkish town near the Syrian border after what appears to have been a chemical attack by Syrian warplanes on rebel-held Khan Shaikhoun in Idlib province.
The attack killed at least 70 people, including children, one of the deadliest since the Syrian war began six years ago.
The World Health Organization said victims bore the signs of exposure to nerve agents. Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's military categorically denied using chemical weapons and blamed "terrorist" groups for the carnage.
But images of the dead and injured were broadcast from Syria within hours, and prompted US president Donald Trump to launch punitive missile strikes against the military of Bashar al-Assad.
A lot of this anxiety and uncertainty and news about North Korea these days is actually driven by President Trump. Mr. Trump is being seen as someone unlike other previous American presidents. Mr. Trump is seen as unpredictable a little bit. You don’t really know what Mr. Trump is going to do. And he says one thing one day, and he’s likely to say another thing the next day. And so people here have a feeling that they can’t really understand Mr. Trump and what the U.S. policy on North Korea is under President Trump.
President Donald Trump authorized cruise missile strikes against President Bashar al-Assad's military in Syria last week after the regime used sarin gas on their own people, including children. The strikes, which saw 59 tomahawk missiles launched from ships in the eastern Mediterranean, hit the base used to launch the chemical attack.
The west has blamed the Syrian air force for the attack on Khan Sheikhun area in southern Idlib on 4 April to which Donald Trump responded with cruise missile attacks that led to the destruction of more than 20 Syrian warplanes. It was the most decisive US military intervention since the war began, and raised the question of whether America will launch fresh attacks if evidence of further chemical weapons emerges.
Russia has also questioned how members of the White Helmets civilian rescue mission were able to operate in the area so soon after the attack.
The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe has sent a military observer mission to Ukraine, but it can only expand its mission to monitor the vote if the Ukrainian government invites it to. 
"The plan and the commitment to the Russian government is for this to be spread out over time in legacy format to each of the 80 regions in Russia and that's a fantastic dream of ours to be able to influence and transform the biggest nation in the world," he said.
Both the United States and European Union have threatened sanctions if no significant progress occurs soon, but major economic ties between Russia and European powers such as Germany raise questions about the strength of any EU steps.
Crimea is known as a pro-Russian area, but it is not without its diversity. 
See above. Even if the vote goes as planned, its legitimacy will continue to be questioned. 
