The economy minister, Nobuteru Ishihara, said on Tuesday that stimulus measures were likely to include assistance for small businesses.
She said the Scottish government would allow residents on the small Hebridean island of Ulva to launch a community buyout worth about £4.25m; end council tax payments to care leavers; set up a £6m rural tourism fund; and approve Scotland’s first low-emissions zone in Glasgow. Plans for the new energy company, due to be set up by 2021, would emerge in a forthcoming energy bill.
“There are concerns about lessening the impact of the British referendum on Japan’s small and medium-sized companies,” Ishihara said.
“Taking steps to provide liquidity to small firms could be a big factor in economic stimulus steps that we compile.”
The Chinese premier, Li Keqiang, said on Tuesday that the government would not allow “rollercoaster rides and drastic changes in the capital markets” in the wake of Brexit turmoil that took the yuan to five and a half year lows.
The UK’s challenge to build a clean, secure and affordable energy system has become significantly harder amid the political and economic turmoil following the nation’s vote to leave the European Union.
Higher customer bills and delayed or cancelled projects are expected by experts, the most pessimistic of whom warn of the lights going out. The optimists argue that the global rush towards clean energy and strong domestic UK climate change targets can keep the transition to clean, green energy moving forward.
However, the leading Brexiters, such as climate change doubter and likely next prime minister Boris Johnson, will play a critical role. If the deal they negotiate with the EU means close ties - and crucially access, like Norway, to Europe’s internal energy market (IEM) - the long-term dent to the UK’s energy prospects may be reduced. But a more decisive break with the world’s biggest single market would leave the UK out in the cold.
National Grid has issued a warning that energy bills would rise and energy security would fall if, like Switzerland, the UK was excluded from Europe’s IEM.
“It is vital the UK retains access to the IEM, which provides stability for energy companies and helps keep household bills down,” said a spokeswoman. “UK energy security depends on gas and electricity from the IEM and it is essential therefore that we take no risks with that. The issue of energy needs to be treated with the highest importance by the government as the negotiations on Britain’s exit begin.”
SSE, one of the UK’s big six energy companies, agreed. “The UK government should be mindful of the importance the harmonisation of the [UK] energy market with the countries in Europe can have on efforts to deliver clean, secure and affordable energy. Collaboration with other European countries on energy matters is important for UK consumers,” it said in a statement.
“Given the scale of planned investment, even a moderate change of [0.5%] to the cost of financing, sustained for multiple years, would raise costs significantly, possibly in the order of hundreds of millions of pounds,” the research stated. “Further upwards pressure on costs would result from the likely devaluation of the pound, given the role imported goods and services play in UK energy supply.”
Before the referendum, energy and climate change secretary Amber Rudd warned of an “electric shock” from Brexit, citing the Vivid report. The boss of Centrica, which owns British Gas, agreed: “The probability is that our customers in the UK will see higher energy costs [with an exit].”
The political uncertainty now present is starkly illustrated by the diametrically opposed views of Rudd’s deputy minister, Andrea Leadsom. Brexit was a “superb result” for the UK, she said. Leadsom said freedom from EU laws on state aid would benefit UK bill payers, though how looser rules on subsidies would achieve that is unclear. Michael Gove, another leading Brexiter, said the 5% VAT charged on energy could be cut.
However, virtually all energy industry observers have a negative outlook for the UK’s post-EU energy system. Prof Paul Younger, at the University of Glasgow, said the vote to leave “blasts a hole” in the embryonic EU energy union, which would provide a huge market for the UK’s large offshore wind and tidal resources, as well as smooth out the intermittency of rising renewable energy.
Nina Skorupska, at the Renewable Energy Association, said: “The result raises serious questions. Energy policy must be a priority for the government now, with industry needing reassurance and clarity on priorities. The first must be confirmation of the 5th carbon budget, which will hopefully give some confidence in the long-term direction of UK energy policy.” Under UK law, the government has until Thursday to accept or reject the latest carbon-cutting proposals from its own climate advisers.
The flight risk is particularly high for the energy sector, in which many major players are foreign companies. The most high-profile is French company EDF, which wants to build a huge, heavily subsidised and highly controversial nuclear power plant at Hinkley Point in Somerset.
The plant is an important part of the UK government’s plan to keep the lights on and emissions down, but is at high risk from a change of leadership, said energy analyst Nick Butler: “Osborne has been a powerful supporter of new nuclear. He has tolerated both a sharp rise in costs, even at a time when the price of every other form of energy has been falling, and successive delays that leave the project years behind schedule and billions of pounds over budget. On the assumption that he joins David Cameron in retiring in three months time, his successor may take a tougher line and pursue different options.”
EDF claims Brexit does not affect their plans, but other big clean energy players have expressed worries. “We still want to grow in the UK, particularly in wind power, but clearly a significant change like an exit from the EU introduces more risk to the sector for an unforeseen period of time,” said a spokesman for Vattenfall. SSE said political risk had risen.
“Business really hates uncertainty,” said Nick Molho, at the Aldersgate Group. But he said the global surge in clean energy and action on climate change provided very strong reasons for the UK follow suit, even from outside the EU.
“In 2015, the international market for low-carbon goods and services was already worth $5.5tn and this has continued to grow since the successful climate change summit in Paris in December,” he said. “It is in the UK’s interest to continue growing its low-carbon economy, a sector that was worth over £46bn in 2014 and was already employing over 238,000 people directly. The low-carbon economy may fare better [than others] if the government commits to its own targets - the UK is a pretty big market.”
Jonathan Gaventa, from thinktank E3G, said that legal EU targets for renewable energy for 2020 had been a major catalyst for investment, but that the bloc’s 2030 target is not nationally binding: “So current UK renewable energy investment is driven by the underlying need for clean energy in the UK. This need does not change.”
The entrepreneur does not have the right to vote in UK elections because he lives in the British Virgin Islands, but has weighed in on the Brexit debate, pointing out that he employs 50,000 people in the UK.The few countries that have been given access to the European free-trade zone without joining the European Union — notably, Iceland, Norway and Switzerland — all contribute to the bloc’s budget and accept its bedrock principle of free movement of workers, the very issues that angered so many of the Britons who voted to leave.
Mr. Johnson is seen as the front-runner to replace Mr. Cameron as leader of the Conservatives, but he has made many enemies. The home secretary, Theresa May, who is in charge of domestic security and who advocated remaining in the European Union, has emerged as perhaps the most credible alternative.
Fresh off the boos and turned backs that greeted his appearance at the European Council earlier in the day, Farage said warnings of economic chaos following the vote won't come to pass, but suggested even if they do, it would be worth it.
Farage, a member of the European parliament since 1999, derided his fellow members who booed him Tuesday when he spoke at the Council meeting in Brussels, the first since U.K. voters approved the exit referendum.
Richard Branson, the billionaire founder of Virgin Group, said his company had ditched a planned acquisition after the U.K. voted last Thursday to leave the European Union.
Branson is one of Britain's most successful entrepreneurs, worth an estimated $4.8 billion. But his company has been hit hard by the fallout since the EU referendum. A record $3 trillion was wiped off global stocks on Friday and Monday.
Brexit's broken promises: Health care, immigration and the economy
Related: Apartments are getting smaller
My third and most important lesson: The benefits of globalization aren’t universal, and even if they are positive, they aren’t well understood. This was, at its core, a communication failure. For the well educated and privileged, European Union membership has been a boon. But for others, globalization has been very different. In certain British communities, there is a sense that immigration from Central and Eastern Europe has driven down wages and strained public services. But there is little understanding in those communities that European Union money has, in many cases, brought jobs, like the Nissan factory in Sunderland.
Energy plan is one of several aimed at boosting SNP’s appeal to rural and leftwing voters after party lost Westminster seats
Nicola Sturgeon has pledged to set up a state-owned energy company in Scotland to offer cheaper power to homeowners, as she seeks to restore her battered party’s confidence.
Seizing on a policy pushed by Scottish Labour, the first minister said power from the publicly owned energy company would be sold as cheaply as possible.
Since 1999, Scotland has had devolved government, meaning many, but not all, decisions are made at the Scottish Parliament in Holyrood, Edinburgh. In May 2011, the nationalist Scottish National Party, which had campaigned on a promise to hold an independence referendum, surprised many by winning an outright majority in the Scottish Parliament.
“During the referendum campaign, I said I want my country back,” Mr. Farage said on Monday. “What I’m saying today is I want my life back, and it begins right now.”
May had also wanted the UK to leave the European Convention on Human Rights, but has now dropped the idea with Parliament unlikely to support it.
It's not alone. Other Italian bank stocks have fallen by about 30% since June 23, when the U.K. voted to leave the European Union. Italian officials are trying to find ways to shore up the country's financial system.
Related: Italian bank crisis may be collateral damage from Brexit
The chief executive of JPMorgan (JPM) said before the June 23 referendum he thought Brexit would be a "terrible deal for the British economy." Asked by an Italian newspaper how the European Union should now respond to the vote, Dimon said it must work together to address its weaknesses.
The Irish government must act to guarantee the progress made by the Good Friday Agreement and subsequent accords. Ireland’s prime minister, Enda Kenny, supports my proposal for an All-Ireland forum of political parties and civic partners to deal with the consequences of Brexit. We need maximum coordination among those who support the democratic demand that the North remain in the European Union.
Despite being part of the Remain camp in the run-up to the referendum, May will push ahead with the UK's divorce from Europe -- "Brexit means Brexit," she said in typically no-nonsense style.
Looking ahead over the next three months, 26% more Rics members expected sales to drop further than expected a busier housing market. “This is the most negative reading for near-term expectations since 1998,” Rics said.
The poll showed people were gloomier about their current and future personal finances and about the current and future state of the UK economy. Some of the results will have been collected before Theresa May became prime minister on 13 July and appointed a new cabinet, so ministers will be hoping a return to some political stability could improve confidence readings in coming months.
The report follows a clutch of business surveys this week suggesting the vote to leave the EU could derail Britain’s economy following relatively strong economic growth in the run-up to the referendum. GDP was revealed to be up 0.6% in the second quarter, greater than the 0.4% growth seen in the previous three months, but more timely indicators pointed to falling confidence among car factories, high street stores and in the construction industry.
The company’s share price, which had fallen sharply from 528p on the day of the EU referendum, was up by about 1.5% on Friday morning, at 416p.
Britain’s decision to leave the EU has triggered a sharp fall in the value of the pound versus the dollar and the euro, making it more expensive for Britons to travel abroad. It has also caused a slump in consumer confidence. The latest poll from market researcher GfK recorded the biggest slide in sentiment for more than 26 years in July.
IAG posted an operating profit before one-off items of €555m in the second quarter, up from €530m a year earlier, but less than the €562m predicted by analysts. The group took a currency hit of €148m in the quarter, mainly due to the weak pound, as it reports results in euros. Traditionally, the second quarter is the most profitable part of the year.
The company has scaled back expansion plans for the next six months and is reviewing ideas for capacity growth and spending next year.
