London (CNN) A social media campaign calling for Britons to wear safety pins as a sign of solidarity with the country's immigrant population has taken off following its decision to leave the EU last week.
News of a spike in racial abuse in the days after the referendum led to a social media campaign calling for people to wear safety pins as a sign of solidarity with the country's immigrant population.
A string of racially motivated crimes have been reported in post-Brexit Britain. And as police begin investigations into allegations of hate crimes against the foreign-born population around the UK, Twitter user Allison (who goes by the handle @cheeahs ) suggested the simple sign of solidarity.
I quite like the idea of just putting a safety pin, empty of anything else, on your coat. A literal SAFETY pin!
Additionally, Allison -- originally from the U.S. but a resident in the UK for the last six years -- is keen to point out wearing a safety pin should not be passive act, it's a pledge.
"From the beginning, I've always said if you're going to wear the safety pin, you've got to back it up. So if you put it on, you are pledging to support people and to intervene and report if you see incidences of racial or xenophobic abuse."
The social movement is not dissimilar to #Illridewithyou, a hashtag campaign that emerged out of Sydney in 2014 following a flare up of anti-Muslim sentiment after a gunman took hostages in a CBD cafe.
But Allison also has a few choice words for commentators who think the campaign is pointless.
Despite some backlash, Allison says most of the reaction has been "overwhelmingly positive." Three days since unwittingly launching the initiative against racism, she's thrilled by how many are taking to social media to share their #safetypins and reassure their fellow Britons that they are welcome and supported regardless of ethnicity or background.
Across Britain, hundreds of instances of racial abuse and hate crimes have been reported since the referendum, aimed not just at immigrants from European Union nations but also at blacks, Muslims and Asians from other places who were not central to the debate over European immigration. A Polish family’s home in Plymouth was set on fire on Thursday; the family was sent a letter that read, “Go back to your country,” and a warning that the family itself would be targeted next.
Some residents said the outbursts of racial abuse could reflect Leave voters’ disappointment at having to face, for months or even years, the very people they had implicitly rejected in the referendum.
