At the pithead, Yefromov was gloomy about the mine's prospects. Instead of the EU, Ukraine would be better off joining Vladimir Putin's rival Eurasian Union, he suggested. "It's our only chance," he said.
A large majority of its population voted in favor of joining Russia in a controversial referendum 10 days ago. Russian lawmakers in turn swiftly voted to absorb the Black Sea peninsula, where Russia has a major naval base, into the Russian Federation, and President Vladimir Putin signed the treaty into law.
Donetsk was founded in the 1860s by an enterprising Welshman, John Hughes, who constructed its first steel mill. In recent febrile weeks some pro-Russian campaigners have been calling for Donetsk to follow Crimea and join Russia. More than 7,000 Ukrainians, though, have voted in a spoof online referendum for the city of 1 million to become part of another state – the United Kingdom.
He rejected differences — that all sides approved holding the referendum in Scotland, that the Kosovars were being killed by their own government, and that none of the others have been asked to vote under what amounts to military occupation, as occurred in Crimea. “The Crimea would vote like this in any case, under any conditions,” he said.
The Russian Foreign Ministry said the U.N. vote -- which followed Moscow's annexation of Ukraine's Crimea region last week on the basis of the hastily called referendum -- would do nothing to help resolve the situation.
Russia set out a series of tough conditions on Sunday night for agreeing a diplomatic solution to the crisis over its annexation of Crimea, demanding that the US and its European partners accept its proposal that ethnic Russian regions of eastern and southern Ukraine be given extensive autonomous powers independent of Kiev.
The Russian has drawn international condemnation over his support for Syria's Bashar al-Assad and annexation of the Crimean region of Ukraine.
There was no direct confirmation from Russian officials. The Kremlin’s statement describing the same telephone conversation made no mention of any troop withdrawals. It said only that the leaders “discussed various aspects of the situation in Ukraine, including the possibility for international involvement in restoring stability” and that the pair had also talked about constitutional overhaul in Ukraine and another troubled region of Eastern Europe, the separatist Transnistria region of Moldova.Macron described the two leaders’ conversation as “extremely frank and direct”, saying he had made clear “everything I thought on different subjects”. He said he would be “constantly vigilant” about gay rights in Chechnya, where Russian officials are actively investigating claims of a purge of gay men.
