In today's show, we explain how tensions have escalated in Ukraine, how sudden rain for a drought-stricken state made some matters worse, and how NASA plans to keep closer tabs on global weather. We also kick off Women's History Month with a report about a young woman who's making sports history at her high school.
We're looking for your feedback about CNN Student News. Please use this page to leave us comments about today's program, including what you think about our stories and our resources. Also, feel free to tell us how you use them in your classroom. The educators on our staff will monitor this page and may respond to your comments as well.
On this page you will find today's show Transcript, the Daily Curriculum, and a place for you to leave feedback.  
Please note that there may be a delay between the time when the video is available and when the transcript is published.
What images of natural disasters are most effective in a news broadcast? How can journalists ensure the images they choose are appropriate?
Key Concepts: Identify or explain these subjects you heard about in today's show:
1. In what southern region of Ukraine is there strong support for Russia? What happened there over the weekend? How did the U.S. respond? How did Russia address this issue?
3. Who is Julia Ernst? How is she making history at her high school? How does she say some young men respond to the challenge of wrestling her?
1. What unique challenges might face a nation like Ukraine, whose people are deeply divided about their country's future? Can you think of potential diplomatic solutions to the situation there? In your view, should the international community get involved? If so, to what extent? If not, why not?
2. In what different ways might residents respond to a mandatory evacuation of their homes? Why do you think some choose to stay? What risks might they face if they do so?
3. How would you define "trailblazer"? What challenges might be experienced by a female competitor in a male-dominated sport? Why might male wrestlers respond in different ways to the challenge of competing against Julia Ernst? What lessons do you think she has learned from her wins (and losses)?
CNN Student News is created by a team of journalists and educators who consider the Common Core State Standards, national standards in different subject areas, and state standards when producing the show and curriculum. We hope you use our free daily materials along with the program, and we welcome your feedback on them.
We're looking for your feedback about CNN Student News. Please use this page to leave us comments about today's program, including what you think about our stories and our resources. Also, feel free to tell us how you use them in your classroom. The educators on our staff will monitor this page and may respond to your comments as well.
We're looking for your feedback about CNN Student News. Please use this page to leave us comments about today's program, including what you think about our stories and our resources. Also, feel free to tell us how you use them in your classroom. The educators on our staff will monitor this page and may respond to your comments as well.
We're looking for your feedback about CNN Student News. Please use this page to leave us comments about today's program, including what you think about our stories and our resources. Also, feel free to tell us how you use them in your classroom. The educators on our staff will monitor this page and may respond to your comments as well.
We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.We're looking for your feedback about CNN Student News. Please use this page to leave us comments about today's program, including what you think about our stories and our resources. Also, feel free to tell us how you use them in your classroom. The educators on our staff will monitor this page and may respond to your comments as well.
Puigdemont suggested he planned to take part from Brussels, telling a local TV channel: “I can run a campaign from anywhere in the world, as we are in living in a globalised world.” He had already signalled his intention to stay in Brussels as long as possible, retaining a defence lawyer and saying he believed the Spanish courts were politicised, although he has ruled out claiming political asylum.
A Spanish judge issued an international arrest warrant for Puigdemont on Friday, a day after eight members of the dissolved Catalan government were jailed in Spain.
Today, the leaders of this democratic project stand accused of rebellion and face the severest punishment possible under the Spanish penal code – the same as for cases of terrorism or murder: 30 years in prison. The vice-president and seven Catalan government ministers have been in prison since last Thursday, as well as two Catalan civic leaders, while orders for the rest of the Catalan government to be detained have been issued. This is a colossal outrage that will have serious consequences.
Timeline Eight key moments in the Catalan independence campaign Show Hide Spain’s constitutional court strikes down parts of a 2006 charter on Catalan autonomy that had originally increased the region’s fiscal and judicial powers and described it as a “nation”. The court rules that using the word “nation” has no legal value and also rejects the “preferential” use of Catalan over Spanish in municipal services. Almost two weeks later, hundreds of thousands protest on the streets of Barcelona, chanting “We are a nation! We decide!” At the height of Spain’s economic crisis, more than a million people protest in Barcelona on Catalonia’s national day, demanding independence in what will become a peaceful, annual show of strength. The pro-independence government of Artur Mas defies the Madrid government and Spain’s constitutional court by holding a symbolic vote on independence. Turnout is just 37%, but more than 80% of those who voted - 1.8 million people - vote in favour of Catalan sovereignty. Carles Puigdemont, who has replaced Mas as regional president, announces an independence referendum will be held on 1 October. Spain’s central government says it will block the referendum using all the legal and political means at its disposal. The Catalan parliament approves referendum legislation after a heated, 11-hour session that sees 52 opposition MPs walk out of the chamber in Barcelona in protest at the move. Spain’s constitutional court suspends the legislation the following day, but the Catalan government vows to press ahead with the vote. Police arrest 14 Catalan government officials suspected of organising the referendum and announce they have seized nearly 10 million ballots destined for the vote. Some 40,000 people protest against the police crackdown in Barcelona and Puigdemont accuses the Spanish government of effectively suspending regional autonomy and declaring a de facto state of emergency. Close to 900 people are injured as police attempt to stop the referendum from taking place. The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%. Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic. Spanish prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, fires regional president, Carles Puigdemont, and orders regional elections to be held on 21 December.
MADRID — A judge who sits on Spain’s Supreme Court on Thursday granted bail to a handful of Catalan lawmakers awaiting trial on rebellion charges in contrast with the jailing last week of former members of the Catalan government.
On Thursday, the supreme court ruled to release on bail the Catalan parliament’s speaker Carme Forcadell and four other lawmakers, who enabled the declaration of independence by overseeing a parliamentary vote. Another lawmaker was released without bail.
MADRID — In his first visit to Catalonia since taking control of the restive region in Spain, Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy on Sunday urged Catalans to vote in next month’s elections to defeat the independence movement and return the region to “normality.”
RT was “a lot more balanced than Sputnik on Catalonia”, Nimmo said, which suggested there had been no central direction on how to treat the story. “Russia divides the world into friendly and unfriendly countries and Spain tends to be seen as one of the friendlier ones,” he said, contrasting the Spanish government’s approach with that of London, which has taken a tougher line. “The Russian government does not have the same strategic interest in destabilising Spain as it does with the UK.”
Spain’s prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, claimed on Monday that half of the Twitter accounts that amplified the issue of Catalan independence were registered in Russia and 30% in Venezuela.
Mr. Rajoy paid homage to Mr. Maza for what he called in a post on Twitter “a life of work at the service of the state.”
Police warned that anyone obstructing the bailiffs in their work would face charges of contempt of court or obstructing an officer.
The move to arrest the officers came after the police successfully cleared one of Hong Kong’s busiest shopping streets of encamped protesters on Wednesday. But only hours later, demonstrators gathered again in the Mong Kok neighborhood, only a short distance away from the original encampment on Nathan Road.
Protesters calling for universal suffrage have occupied camps around the semi-autonomous Chinese territory for two months, including a main protest site outside government buildings in Admiralty on Hong Kong Island.
Police arrested at least five protesters, according to the Hong Kong Federation of Students, one of the groups that has played an important role in organising the protest movement, which is seeking free elections in the former British colony.
“We feel that the government feels no pressure if this movement simply drags on like this,” said Oscar Lai, a leader of Scholarism, a protest group of high school and university students, who urged protesters to peacefully block the Hong Kong leader’s office. “This escalation shows that Hong Kong people can’t wait anymore.”
The UK and China have been seeking to repair ties, which have been strained since Cameron met the Dalai Lama, Tibet’s spiritual leader, in 2012. The British government is also conducting an urgent inquiry into the use of UK-made teargas by the Hong Kong police in light of renewed and violent clashes in the former UK colony. British teargas was used by Hong Kong police against demonstrators on 28 September, ministers have confirmed.
A total of 24 people surrendered for “taking part in an unauthorised assembly”, the Hong Kong government said in a statement. “Police will conduct follow-up investigations based on the information provided,” it said.
“People are saying, ‘At least when we had bombs, they listened to us,’ “ Mr. Simeoni said, only half joking. Some 30 militants remain in French prisons, he said.
The 18-year-old activist, who leads a student group called Scholarism, wants open elections for Hong Kong's next leader, but Beijing has said Hong Kong may only hold elections if candidates are nominated by a small committee. 
The political battle comes with a legal one. On Monday a Spanish supreme court judge will decide whether to release Catalan cabinet members so that they can run in the election. The ministers are currently in custody accused of sedition, rebellion and misuse of public funds, all of which they deny. Pro-independence activists have launched a “yellow-ribbon” campaign in support for what they describe as political prisoners.
(CNN) A Spanish judge has ruled the former Vice President of Catalonia and three other senior Catalan pro-independence leaders will remain in jail for their part in October's independence referendum, ruled illegal by Spain's top court.
The judge’s decision came a day after ordering that four separatist leaders, including Oriol Junqueras, the ousted deputy leader of Catalonia, be kept in jail.
The sight of peaceful, sober-minded pro-democracy leaders among the 209 people arrested during the clearance of the camp embodied a volatile new current in Hong Kong politics, said Fernando Cheung, a democracy supporter who is a member of the city’s Legislative Council. Many of those arrested, such as Martin Lee, the founding chairman of the city’s Democratic Party and a Queen’s Counsel of the British bar, were neither radicals nor given to confronting the police, he said.
The "Occupy Central" protests make the upcoming annual policy address by the city's leader, Chief Executive C.Y. Leung, in mid January the most critical since Hong Kong reunified with China in 1997. 
Shum, who became an officer of the Chinese University of Hong Kong’s student union in 2013, and deputy secretary general of the Hong Kong Federation of Students this spring, says he won’t fret about the prospect of being blacklisted.
Ebola has arrived in the U.S. Today on CNN Student News, find out how this case differs from that of others treated in America, and take a tour of a CDC command center focused on Ebola. We also report on the U.S. Secret Service and a recent breach of its White House security, and we update you on protests in Hong Kong and which college major leads to the most lucrative jobs.
However, Cornellà and the other beltway towns are expected to play a key role in this month’s election as the conflict over independence drives even the most apathetic voters to the polls. The centre-right Ciutadans party, the leading anti-independence party in the region, has been making inroads into an area with a traditionally low turnout in regional votes.
That, at least, is what Evan Ellis, a researcher at the U.S. Army War College and considered by some to be a leading expert on China-Latin America relations, states in his new book China on the Ground in Latin America: Challenges for the Chinese and Impacts on the Region. Ellis’s main argument is that in the last few years the Chinese have started to establish a new, “significant” physical presence in Latin America and the Caribbean – following trade deals, acquisitions, loans and loan-backed construction projects, among other things. As a result, Ellis argues that China now finds itself, for the first time in its 5,000 year history, connected to however many million non-Chinese people in other countries and dependent on the “success and well-being of its commercial representatives in distant parts of the world.”
The deposed Catalan president, Carles Puigdemont, is in Brussels to avoid facing the same fate as Junqueras: a possible jail term of up to 30 years.
Hui, 66, was sent to prison on Tuesday for seven and a half years after being found guilty of five graft charges, including misconduct in a public office, making him the highest-ranking official in Hong Kong’s history to be convicted of taking bribes.
An opinion poll by the Center for Opinion Studies in Catalonia found that more than half of Catalans between the ages of 18 and 34 would vote to break away from Spain given a simple choice of yes or no. Pro-independence parties vying for power in Thursday's regional election are hoping that support will translate into votes.
After Catalonia’s separatist lawmakers declared independence in late October, Mr. Rajoy invoked emergency powers for the first time in Spain’s democratic history. He ousted the Catalan government and imposed direct rule on the formerly autonomous region.
Catalonia’s election result is a serious rebuff for the Spanish government, which called Thursday’s poll after putting the region under direct rule in October. Mariano Rajoy’s government wanted to nip the independence mood in the bud. Instead, parties that favour independence have been returned with a narrow majority in the new Catalan parliament in spite of, and perhaps because of, the jailing and exile of key leaders. Yet the result is hardly a triumph for these parties, which although winning 70 of the 135 seats, had the backing of only 47.5% of the votes in a very high turnout. There is no mandate for Catalan independence there. But there is no mandate for the status quo either.
But far from a deja vu, this will be something never seen before, for the likely president of that government, Carles Puigdemont, is in self-imposed exile in Belgium, some of his ministers are in jail in Spain, and all are accused by the supreme court of rebellion, a charge that could result in up to 30 years in prison. Rajoy’s gamble has certainly backfired. It could be argued that he didn’t have much choice, once the Catalan parliament had broken the law. And the move did defuse the declaration of independence. But the idea that it would permanently resolve the crisis was predicated on an assumption that is very popular in Spain but is wrong: that there is a “hidden pro-Spain majority” in Catalonia, which has never been allowed to express itself at the polls, cowed by the prevailing nationalist atmosphere.
Story highlights The former Catalan leader says Spain's PM should accept regional election results
Mariano Rajoy says he will call on Catalonia's Parliament to meet January 17
(CNN) The former leader of Catalonia urged Madrid to enter political negotiations following a regional election that gave pro-independence parties a majority in the Catalan parliament.
In a recorded address made from self-imposed exile in Brussels, Belgium, Puigdemont appealed to Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy to accept the election results.
"The ballot boxes have spoken, democracy has spoken, everyone has been able to express themselves. What is Rajoy waiting for in order to accept the results?" Puigdemont said in a speech posted Saturday on social media.
It's unlikely Rajoy will be receptive to the appeal. He has refused to meet with Puigdemont, who went to Brussels after Spanish authorities announced they were seeking his arrest . Rajoy says he will meet only with leaders of the pro-unity Ciutadans (Citizens) party."We are a democratically mature country that has earned the right to become a republic of free men and women," said former Catalan President Carles Puigdemont.
