British expats could forfeit their rights to live in Spain if they vote to leave the EU, the Spanish prime minister has warned, saying forgoing free movement rights would be “negative for everyone”.
At every turn, Britain proclaims its singularity. Most countries fly the European flag next to their national flags; Britain doesn’t. Most of Europe uses euros; Britain uses pounds. British airports have a passport line that says “British and E.U. Passports.” British politicians in the last 20 years have increasingly talked about British values and British traditions, about what sets Britons apart from Europeans rather than what they have in common.
More than 400,000 British citizens live and work in Spain, while 100,000 Spanish citizens live in the UK, Mariano Rajoy said.
“But, above all, it would be very negative for British citizens: the European Union is based, ever since its foundation, on the principles of freedom of movement of people, goods, services and capitals.”
UK citizens, he said, would forfeit crucial rights to live and work across the continent. “Leaving the European Union would mean that British citizens would lose their right to move freely, work and do business within the largest economic area, the largest market in the world,” he said.
Rajoy’s comments came after the Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, warned that a pledge by Brexit campaigners’ to enact a points-based immigration system would mean British citizens would face similar barriers to travel and work in Europe.
Leave campaigners have argued that new rights for British citizens to live and work in other EU countries could be negotiated after Brexit.
A British citizen living overseas who has been registered to vote in the UK in the past 15 years.
Do you need to re-register to vote in the referendum?
At the same time another more fundamental problem might arise in the wake of a UK referendum leave vote. What if Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales vote remain, their MPs propose an amendment to parliament’s EEA motion in support of the UK’s continued membership of the EU, and pro-EU English MPs vote with them to pass their amendment? The UK would be plunged into a full-blown constitutional crisis concerning the very sovereignty of parliament.
Later this month, Britain may do what no country has done before and vote to leave the European Union.
Vote Leave, the official out campaign, responded to leaks of the plans by accusing the chancellor of breaking seven key Tory pledges on which they were elected last year, and set out a competing vision of a post-Brexit world in which Britain would claw back money from the EU. The campaign group said that parliament would react to an out vote by bringing in legislation to cut VAT on fuel, boost NHS funding and bring in a points-based system for immigration.
Any “out” vote would not force Europeans to leave Britain, at least not right away. For the next two years, the British government would negotiate new treaties with the European Union over labor movement and other matters.
Responding to the latest IMF remarks, Matthew Elliott, chief executive of Vote Leave said: “The IMF has chosen to ignore the positive benefits of leaving the EU and instead focused only on the supposed negatives. If we vote leave, we can create 300,000 jobs by doing trade deals with fast growing economies across the globe. We can stop sending the £350m we pay Brussels every week. That is why it is safer to vote leave.”
David Cameron, along with the Treasury, the Bank of England, the International Monetary Fund and others have been attacked by the leave campaign for exaggerating the economic risks of Brexit. This criticism has been widely accepted by the British media and many financial analysts. As a result, British voters are now grossly underestimating the true costs of leaving.
I want people to know what the consequences of leaving the EU would be before they cast their votes, rather than after. A vote to leave could see the week end with a Black Friday, and serious consequences for ordinary people.Jeremy Cook, chief economist at currency broker WorldFirst, watched sterling plummet throughout the early hours of Friday. He said: “Sterling is in freefall at the moment. It looks like its goose is cooked.” At one point, Cook shouted across the trading room: “It’s fallen into the 30s,”, as the likelihood of a leave vote increased and the pound fell below $1.40.
As more results came in, Cook said the pound was suffering swings in volatility that exceeded the financial crisis.
Addressing "Leave" supporters at a results party in London as UK broadcasters began to call the referendum results in their favor, UK Independence Party (UKIP) leader Nigel Farage said the country was marking its "Independence Day."
In London, the maneuvering began almost immediately to succeed Mr. Cameron, who said he would stay on while his Conservative Party went through the process of settling on a new leader. Among the most prominent of the possible candidates is Boris Johnson, the former mayor of London who was a leader of the Leave campaign. He praised Mr. Cameron as an “extraordinary politician” while saying he was sad to see him go.
JUST WATCHED Labour Party leader under fire following Brexit vote Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Labour Party leader under fire following Brexit vote 03:38
The new, emergency government is made up of former opposition politicians from two parties - Yulia Tymoshenko's centre-right Batkivshchyna and Svoboda. A third opposition party, Udar, led by former boxing champion Vitali Klitschko, supports from outside. Maidan activists fill some posts. Yanukovych's Party of Regions, meanwhile, has disavowed its vanished leader and gone into opposition.
Analysts say the change in tone may be necessary to begin reeling in unrealistic expectations about the changes the referendum could produce, but it also holds considerable political peril for Mr. Johnson and other Conservative Party leaders of the Leave campaign, especially with populist sentiment spreading and right-wing groups like the U.K. Independence Party eager to build support.
Labour’s leftwing party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, was elected only in 2015 by a Bernie Sanders-style upsurge among party activists. This week, he saw more than half his senior colleagues resign their posts and back a parliamentary vote of no confidence (by 170 MPs to 40) in his leadership.
The detailed analysis of the result suggests that the dividing lines of politics are shifting: as Tony Blair put it, left v right is being supplanted as the driver of political alignment by open v closed – and Britain is split on those lines more or less 50/50. The referendum was decided by people who voted on the basis of national identity and in defiance of rational economic self-interest. The result made clear the existential threat that this poses to the Labour party now – and in the foreseeable future, unless it can square the circle, to the Conservative party too.