More than 400,000 British citizens live and work in Spain, while 100,000 Spanish citizens live in the UK, Mariano Rajoy said.
At every turn, Britain proclaims its singularity. Most countries fly the European flag next to their national flags; Britain doesn’t. Most of Europe uses euros; Britain uses pounds. British airports have a passport line that says “British and E.U. Passports.” British politicians in the last 20 years have increasingly talked about British values and British traditions, about what sets Britons apart from Europeans rather than what they have in common.
“But, above all, it would be very negative for British citizens: the European Union is based, ever since its foundation, on the principles of freedom of movement of people, goods, services and capitals.”
UK citizens, he said, would forfeit crucial rights to live and work across the continent. “Leaving the European Union would mean that British citizens would lose their right to move freely, work and do business within the largest economic area, the largest market in the world,” he said.
Leave campaigners have argued that new rights for British citizens to live and work in other EU countries could be negotiated after Brexit.
A British citizen living overseas who has been registered to vote in the UK in the past 15 years.
Anyone who registered to vote for the May 2015 general election will be registered for the EU referendum.
Your report on the consequences of a leave vote (Guerilla campaign mooted, 7 June) quotes a pro-European MP saying “We would have to respect the mandate of the referendum”. But it is quite unclear what that mandate might be, as the referendum question does not specify the range of alternatives to full EU membership should the UK vote to leave. Until parliament has determined whether, for example, it wishes the UK to remain in the European Economic Area, it would be inappropriate for David Cameron to formally notify the EU of the UK’s intention to withdraw from the EU. A leave vote would therefore need to be followed by an emergency debate in parliament from Monday 27 June onwards about the UK’s withdrawal options, where the most likely outcome, as you indicate, would be overwhelming support for the UK to remain in EEA, which would of course outrage hard-line Brexiters in the Conservative party.
Later this month, Britain may do what no country has done before and vote to leave the European Union.
Vote Leave, the official out campaign, responded to leaks of the plans by accusing the chancellor of breaking seven key Tory pledges on which they were elected last year, and set out a competing vision of a post-Brexit world in which Britain would claw back money from the EU. The campaign group said that parliament would react to an out vote by bringing in legislation to cut VAT on fuel, boost NHS funding and bring in a points-based system for immigration.
Any “out” vote would not force Europeans to leave Britain, at least not right away. For the next two years, the British government would negotiate new treaties with the European Union over labor movement and other matters.
Responding to the latest IMF remarks, Matthew Elliott, chief executive of Vote Leave said: “The IMF has chosen to ignore the positive benefits of leaving the EU and instead focused only on the supposed negatives. If we vote leave, we can create 300,000 jobs by doing trade deals with fast growing economies across the globe. We can stop sending the £350m we pay Brussels every week. That is why it is safer to vote leave.”
As opinion polls on the referendum result fluctuate, I want to offer a clear set of facts, based on my six decades of experience in financial markets, to help voters understand the very real consequences of a vote to leave the EU.
I want people to know what the consequences of leaving the EU would be before they cast their votes, rather than after. A vote to leave could see the week end with a Black Friday, and serious consequences for ordinary people.Spread-betting and trading firm CMC Markets UK was calling the FTSE 100 down 468 points from its overnight close of 6,338 at 5,870. Its chief market analyst, Michael Hewson, said the consequences of the vote looked set to “ripple across the EU and the world”.
The FTSE and pound have been buffeted by close opinion polls during the campaign but in the past week market sentiment has swung to show growing confidence in a vote to remain in the EU. The FTSE has rallied every day this week and by Thursday’s close was up 5.3% for the week so far.In England, every region outside of London voted to leave. The highest vote for leave was in the West Midlands with 59.11% opting for Brexit. In London, 59.94% voted to remain.
The Votes for Each Side
JUST WATCHED Labour Party leader under fire following Brexit vote Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Labour Party leader under fire following Brexit vote 03:38
The new, emergency government is made up of former opposition politicians from two parties - Yulia Tymoshenko's centre-right Batkivshchyna and Svoboda. A third opposition party, Udar, led by former boxing champion Vitali Klitschko, supports from outside. Maidan activists fill some posts. Yanukovych's Party of Regions, meanwhile, has disavowed its vanished leader and gone into opposition.
Analysts say the change in tone may be necessary to begin reeling in unrealistic expectations about the changes the referendum could produce, but it also holds considerable political peril for Mr. Johnson and other Conservative Party leaders of the Leave campaign, especially with populist sentiment spreading and right-wing groups like the U.K. Independence Party eager to build support.
Labour’s leftwing party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, was elected only in 2015 by a Bernie Sanders-style upsurge among party activists. This week, he saw more than half his senior colleagues resign their posts and back a parliamentary vote of no confidence (by 170 MPs to 40) in his leadership.
The detailed analysis of the result suggests that the dividing lines of politics are shifting: as Tony Blair put it, left v right is being supplanted as the driver of political alignment by open v closed – and Britain is split on those lines more or less 50/50. The referendum was decided by people who voted on the basis of national identity and in defiance of rational economic self-interest. The result made clear the existential threat that this poses to the Labour party now – and in the foreseeable future, unless it can square the circle, to the Conservative party too.