Officials said six of the ship’s 462 passengers had died, at least 55 are injured and 179 have been rescued. Many passengers - of which 300 are children - may have been trapped inside the vessel as it listed and sank.
"Pretty much every law, rule, regulation and standard throughout the world says that yes, the captain must stay with the ship until all personnel are safely off of the ship, certainly passengers."
Passenger testimony indicated that the ship had struck rocks about 20 km off the coast of Byungpoong island.
The ferry operator reportedly asked passengers to stay inside their cabins, Kim said, adding that he had not heard an announcement urging people to leave the ship before it sank.
Most countries do not explicitly state that a captain must be the last person to leave a distressed ship, experts say, giving captains the leeway to board lifeboats or nearby ships if they can better command an evacuation from there. South Korea’s law, however, appears to be explicit, allowing the authorities to arrest Mr. Lee for abandoning the boat and its passengers in a time of crisis. An international maritime treaty known as the Safety of Life at Sea — first adopted in 1914 after the Titanic disaster — makes a ship’s captain responsible for the safety of his vessel and everyone on board. A later version of the treaty said that passengers should be able to evacuate within 30 minutes of a general alarm.
"Pretty much every law, rule, regulation and standard throughout the world says that yes, the captain must stay with the ship until all personnel are safely off of the ship, certainly passengers."
An international maritime convention on the safety of life at sea makes a captain responsible for the vessel and all the people on board, but it doesn't stipulate that the captain stay on the ship throughout the crisis.
The captain shakes his head, and says that he believes the Sewol captain has sullied the name of all Korean captains. He says this is the last time he will speak of this tragedy, hoping if he doesn't talk about it his nightmares about not being able to save the children will ease.
At 9:03, one student wondered, “What is the captain doing?”
When he was deserting the ship, the 69-year-old captain was still in his underpants.