Though the strike was settled, its significance has not been lost on China’s government. In an industrial landscape that often looks more like the 19th than the 21st century, the internet is rapidly changing workplace dynamics.
The confrontation with Beijing has moved the territory to the front lines of the battle for democratic rights in China since a government clampdown silenced much dissent on the mainland. Since Hong Kong was returned by Britain to Chinese rule in 1997, it has enjoyed considerable legal autonomy under the “one country, two systems” formula, in which Hong Kong residents retained rights not available elsewhere in China.
Now, on top of technology and a changed economic situation, there is the example of Occupy Central. This peaceful mass movement for democracy in Chinese-administered Hong Kong has brought hundreds of thousands to the streets, mobilised different sections of society, and used the same tools – internet, social media and occupied space – as the horizontal movements in Europe and the US. “China is different”, the perennial excuse of Sinologists for the population’s failure to rebel against Communist party rule, looks hollow since Occupy Central began.
It is not clear how much people inside mainland China know about Occupy Central. But at Sun Yat-sen University in Guangdong last year, students organised a mild, mainly cultural response to it – printing T-shirts with the slogan “Not only birds are free” and launching discussions around related issues. The students involved included some who had previously been factory workers – and who were now involved in advocacy work for factory workers in mainland China.
In the 1990s, when the Chinese government was still dealing with the remnants of an old, industrial, relatively privileged working class, concentrated in heavy industries, worker unrest was treated as tantamount to treason. The initial years of rapid expansion brought chaos and brutality. But before long, official Chinese unions began to organise the migrant workforce, and workers were given basic legal rights. This “normalisation” of labour relations is not threatened by the outbreak of strikes this year. But information technology injects a new dynamic.
If this was only about factory workers versus corrupt bosses, the implications would be interesting but not dramatic. But if you accept that the main faultline in the world is between networks and hierarchies, then China is sitting right on top of it. And China’s workers – who look like digital rebels, but analogue slaves – are right at the heart of the phenomenon.
In an early morning video statement addressed to all Hong Kong residents, Hong Kong Chief Executive C.Y. Leung called for people to leave. He said police have exercised the greatest possible restraint in dealing with the protesters.
The main question burning in the minds of most Hong Kongers is how this will all end – and almost everyone involved can surmise a worst-case scenario. Hong Kong’s former security chief Regina Ip said on Monday that the city government fears a “mini-Tiananmen” – presumably that the protests would be violently dispersed, perhaps by the Chinese military. Nobody wants to see a repeat of 4 June 1989, when Beijing dispatched the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) to open fire on peaceful pro-democracy protesters. The PLA maintains a garrison in Hong Kong, but Leung said in a televised address on Monday morning that the Hong Kong government would not call in the troops. Chinese state media has also emphasised the central government’s confidence in Hong Kong authorities to deal with the protests themselves. That said, the protests continue to escalate, and Beijing seems ready to stand its ground, no matter what the cost.
Chen was posted to the city in 1994 as a member of the preparatory committee for the formation of Hong Kong as a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China. He was China's point-person in the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG), in charge of negotiating with British side over the 1997 handover of power. He now heads the Chinese Association of Hong Kong and Macao Studies, a think-tank based in Beijing.
As a last resort, Beijing could deploy People's Liberation Army (PLA) troops on the streets of Hong Kong, said Lam. 
"Beijing would ... lose face if they were to sack Leung in the near future," says Lam at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
“Of course we love China, but we are worried about damage to Hong Kong economics. That’s why we’re here,” he added.“Hong Kong has been acting as a reference point for China — whatever they want to do, they come to Hong Kong to take a look first, and if it is good they pick it up,” said Li Kui-Wai, an associate professor of economics and finance at the City University of Hong Kong. “In a sense, they are trying to catch up with us.”
“People used to not care so much about politics, and they used to not think so much of Hong Kong as home before 1997,” said Dennis Kwok, 36, a Hong Kong-born lawyer and lawmaker who returned in 2000 and renounced his Canadian citizenship. “But since 1997, the younger people want to have a greater say in public affairs, and they think of Hong Kong as home.”
“What is happening in Hong Kong is about the people of Hong Kong, and any assertion otherwise is an attempt to distract from the issue at hand, which is the people of Hong Kong expressing their desire for universal suffrage and an election that provides a meaningful choice of candidates representative of the voters’ will,” said Scott Robinson, the spokesman for the United States Consulate in Hong Kong. He added that, “U.S. diplomats regularly meet with a broad cross-section of Hong Kong society both in Hong Kong and in Washington and do not support any particular political party or person.”
Also on Wednesday, Hong Kong’s most prominent tycoon, Li Ka-shing, broke his silence over the protests to urge the demonstrators to go home. Li, Asia’s richest man, said that if Hong Kong’s rule of law broke down it would be the city’s “greatest sorrow”.
While FireChat became the app of choice in Hong Kong's -- and saw similar success in protests earlier this year in Taiwan -- Daligault said the app was never designed as a messaging tool for protesters.
Spurred on by police attempts to reopen part of the district to traffic, the protesters' numbers increased overnight, swelling to around 9,000, according to Hong Kong police. 
The scheduled dialogue — the first formal meeting between the two groups — will take place on Tuesday at the Hong Kong Academy of Medicine, and will last two hours, Lam said in a statement. Five officials will take part, and five student representatives. It will be broadcast live. “I am very much looking forward to having this dialogue with the student representatives,” she said.
During that weekend, police in Hong Kong arrested about 70 student protesters, including several of its young leaders, in the mass call for democracy. 
The protests have created a divide among the celebrities in Hong Kong. Many have remained silent, while others have been outspoken in their criticism of the protests and their supporters in the entertainment industry.
Despite its apparent qualms about democracy on its doorstep, in 1990, China committed to the aim of electing Hong Kong’s leader by universal suffrage after it regained sovereignty. “How Hong Kong develops democracy in the future is a matter entirely within the sphere of Hong Kong’s autonomy, and the central government cannot intervene,” People’s Daily quoted Lu Ping as saying in 1993.
Simon said that a crackdown, while unlikely, would be devastating for the city. “Can Hong Kong survive with [student leader] Joshua Wong in jail, or [Next Media CEO] Jimmy Lai in jail – do you think Hong Kong could survive that? I say no. It won’t work. The world’s not going to treat you the same.”
My generation’s political awakening has been simmering for years. Nearly five years ago, young people led protests against the wasteful construction of a new rail line connecting Hong Kong to mainland China. In 2011, many young people, myself included, organized to oppose a national education program of Chinese propaganda that Beijing tried to force on us. I was 14 at the time, and all I could think was that the leaders in Beijing have no right to brainwash us with their warped view of the world.
Now, with Beijing rejecting true democracy in Hong Kong -- despite a public backlash -- the idea of "one country, two systems," seems even more unappealing to the people of Taiwan. 
Britain should be doing more to help the governments of Hong Kong and China settle the situation, he said, calling on Hong Kong’s leaders to offer more concessions to the protesters to encourage them to back down."We can use different media to express ourselves... to tell people what we feel about Hong Kong," Lau said. "I like the peaceful and silent protest and I'm supporting the students behind the scenes."
Just as the protests have upended the notion that Hong Kong people do not care about politics, the blast of public art is changing the image of a city better known for making money than for art and culture. Still best known as an international financial center, and lacking a world-class art museum, Hong Kong has become the world’s third-largest art market behind New York and London, thanks to high-priced auctions and an array of art galleries that have opened here in the past few years.
Hong Kong's triads are known for controlling smuggling, prostitution and illegal gambling rings. Some of their businesses in Mong Kok -- Hong Kong's red light district -- have suffered as a result of the Occupy protests. 
It was supposed to be a routine trip for cheap material from China. Instead she spent more than an hour being searched and interrogated by border guards, and was ultimately put on a bus back to Hong Kong. She was told she was a threat to national security. The reason: she had been videotaped at a protest months ago in Hong Kong.
A growing number of people in Hong Kong who have taken part in the city’s recent pro-democracy protests aresuddenly finding themselves denied entry into China. The action hasshocked many and sparked widespread belief that Chinese authorities have assembled a blacklist with hundreds, perhaps thousands, of names in recent months.
For some, the denials threaten their livelihoods because of how intertwined Hong Kong’s economy is with mainland China’s. They may also cast a chilling pall on freedom of expression and havealready fuelled paranoia among protesters, fearful of future consequences from being on China’s watch lists.
Another promise was suffrage, and at the heart of the current movement – called the Umbrella Revolution or Occupy Central – is the demand that Hong Kong residents be allowed to choose Hong Kong’s leaders themselves, instead of having candidates pre-vetted by Beijing.
According to the Chinese government, Hong Kong residents made 154m trips to the mainland in 2013 alone, up 3.4% from the year before.
Among those who have reported being turned away at the border are a member of the student union at Hong Kong Baptist University, a Lingnan University studentwho was trying to buy books in the Chinese city of Shenzhen and a City University student trying to visit relatives. Eric Tang, 21, a student at Open University of Hong Kong, said he was turned away this month while trying to shop with his girlfriend in Shenzhen.
Over the course of two hours, he said, guards took his Hong Kong ID cards and searched his body and bag. Then they turned on his laptop and rifled through that.
He said he was surprised because he is not a famous figure like the Hong Kong democracy activists and legislators denied entry in the past. He is a Democratic party member, which may have got him tagged, but he suspects his denial was triggered by a 1 July protest he attended – a summer precursor to the current occupying movement that continues to paralyse parts of downtown Hong Kong.
For theyoung design student, who was also arrested at the 1 July protest and released on 2 July,not having access to China may mean buying costlier, inferior design materials in Hong Kong and perhaps a lower grade in her classes. She remains deeply rattled from her interrogation by border guards. But if she had to do it all over again, she would have attended the protests just the same, she said. “I have nothing to be ashamed of. I have no regrets about what I did.”
The young design student nervously picked at her noodles as she recounted being pulled aside last week at the Chinese-Hong Kong border.
When the former British colony was returned to China in 1997, Beijing promised that its residents would continue to enjoy freedoms unseen in the mainland. People in Hong Kong holdlarge annual rallies on the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square crackdown and freely discuss China’s political system on social media like Facebook and Twitter.
“This new trend of denying entry is a powerful weapon, not just against students but against professionals who want to support the movement,” said Willy Lam, a political analyst at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. “Everyone these days needs access to China. It doesn’t matter if you’re an accountant, architect or anything else, that’s where the market is.”
The 23-year-old design student who was stopped last week, for example, asked to speak anonymously for fear of further retaliations by Chinese authorities. Since her hassle at the border, she has avoided saying anything personal or sensitive over the phone in case it is being tapped.Before speaking with a foreign reporter, she checked his press card and compared his face with online pictures searched on a smartphone. “Everything we watch on the news about mainland China – the paranoia, human rights abuses, the way the Communist party treats its citizens – for the first time in my life, I feel that way about Hong Kong,” she said.
