On this page you will find today's show Transcript, the Daily Curriculum, and a place for you to leave feedback.  
We're looking for your feedback about CNN Student News. Please use this page to leave us comments about today's program, including what you think about our stories and our resources. Also, feel free to tell us how you use them in your classroom. The educators on our staff will monitor this page and may respond to your comments as well.
Please note that there may be a delay between the time when the video is available and when the transcript is published.
Key Concepts: Identify or explain these subjects you heard about in today's show:
2. In what different ways might residents respond to a mandatory evacuation of their homes? Why do you think some choose to stay? What risks might they face if they do so?
3. How would you define "trailblazer"? What challenges might be experienced by a female competitor in a male-dominated sport? Why might male wrestlers respond in different ways to the challenge of competing against Julia Ernst? What lessons do you think she has learned from her wins (and losses)?
CNN Student News is created by a team of journalists and educators who consider the Common Core State Standards, national standards in different subject areas, and state standards when producing the show and curriculum. We hope you use our free daily materials along with the program, and we welcome your feedback on them.
We're looking for your feedback about CNN Student News. Please use this page to leave us comments about today's program, including what you think about our stories and our resources. Also, feel free to tell us how you use them in your classroom. The educators on our staff will monitor this page and may respond to your comments as well.
Russia's president signs a treaty to annex Crimea. On today's show, we'll tell you why, and we'll report on how some members of the international community are responding. We also cover challenges facing General Motors, a theory that's making waves among some scientists, and reasons behind the madness of March.
We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.We're looking for your feedback about CNN Student News. Please use this page to leave us comments about today's program, including what you think about our stories and our resources. Also, feel free to tell us how you use them in your classroom. The educators on our staff will monitor this page and may respond to your comments as well.
A particular flashpoint has been the arrest and jailing of separatist leaders, including several members of Puigdemont’s cabinet. They could face charges for crimes including rebellion, sedition and embezzlement for their part in pushing for secession. The jailed politicians, who have mostly been denied bail ahead of trial on the grounds they are a flight risk, say their cases are political persecution. The ousted vice-president, Oriol Junqueras, shared a defiant message from his prison cell via Twitter: “We are never going to renounce freedom, even if the price is prison”. A lawyer for the prisoners went public with complaints of “humiliating” treatment, including strip searches.
A Spanish judge issued an international arrest warrant for Puigdemont on Friday, a day after eight members of the dissolved Catalan government were jailed in Spain.
Today, the leaders of this democratic project stand accused of rebellion and face the severest punishment possible under the Spanish penal code – the same as for cases of terrorism or murder: 30 years in prison. The vice-president and seven Catalan government ministers have been in prison since last Thursday, as well as two Catalan civic leaders, while orders for the rest of the Catalan government to be detained have been issued. This is a colossal outrage that will have serious consequences.
Timeline Eight key moments in the Catalan independence campaign Show Hide Spain’s constitutional court strikes down parts of a 2006 charter on Catalan autonomy that had originally increased the region’s fiscal and judicial powers and described it as a “nation”. The court rules that using the word “nation” has no legal value and also rejects the “preferential” use of Catalan over Spanish in municipal services. Almost two weeks later, hundreds of thousands protest on the streets of Barcelona, chanting “We are a nation! We decide!” At the height of Spain’s economic crisis, more than a million people protest in Barcelona on Catalonia’s national day, demanding independence in what will become a peaceful, annual show of strength. The pro-independence government of Artur Mas defies the Madrid government and Spain’s constitutional court by holding a symbolic vote on independence. Turnout is just 37%, but more than 80% of those who voted - 1.8 million people - vote in favour of Catalan sovereignty. Carles Puigdemont, who has replaced Mas as regional president, announces an independence referendum will be held on 1 October. Spain’s central government says it will block the referendum using all the legal and political means at its disposal. The Catalan parliament approves referendum legislation after a heated, 11-hour session that sees 52 opposition MPs walk out of the chamber in Barcelona in protest at the move. Spain’s constitutional court suspends the legislation the following day, but the Catalan government vows to press ahead with the vote. Police arrest 14 Catalan government officials suspected of organising the referendum and announce they have seized nearly 10 million ballots destined for the vote. Some 40,000 people protest against the police crackdown in Barcelona and Puigdemont accuses the Spanish government of effectively suspending regional autonomy and declaring a de facto state of emergency. Close to 900 people are injured as police attempt to stop the referendum from taking place. The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%. Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic. Spanish prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, fires regional president, Carles Puigdemont, and orders regional elections to be held on 21 December.
Judge Pablo Llarena set bail of €150,000, or about $175,000, for Carme Forcadell, who, as speaker of the Catalan Parliament, had read out Catalonia’s declaration of independence from Spain on Oct. 27, shortly before it was approved by separatist lawmakers.
On Thursday, the supreme court ruled to release on bail the Catalan parliament’s speaker Carme Forcadell and four other lawmakers, who enabled the declaration of independence by overseeing a parliamentary vote. Another lawmaker was released without bail.
Mr. Rajoy’s government took charge of Catalonia on Oct. 27, using emergency powers under Article 155 of the Spanish Constitution, shortly after separatist lawmakers voted for independence from Spain. He fired the Catalan government, dissolved the Catalan Parliament and set new regional elections for Dec. 21.
Defence Minister Dolores de Cospedal said it was clear that a lot the messaging on social media around the Catalan crisis came from Russian territory, though a definitive link to the government had not been proved.
Spain’s prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, claimed on Monday that half of the Twitter accounts that amplified the issue of Catalan independence were registered in Russia and 30% in Venezuela.
In an opinion piece, Mr. Catalá, the justice minister, said that Mr. Maza had been “a man aware of the enormous treasure that we have as Spaniards, our Constitution.”In a random survey of 513 people conducted by the University of Hong Kong, 83% said pro-democracy protesters should cease their occupation of major roads in Hong Kong, while just 13% said the protests should continue.
The move to arrest the officers came after the police successfully cleared one of Hong Kong’s busiest shopping streets of encamped protesters on Wednesday. But only hours later, demonstrators gathered again in the Mong Kok neighborhood, only a short distance away from the original encampment on Nathan Road.
Vidler said Hong Kong police were displaying "increasingly brutal" behavior as the protests entered their third month.
Hundreds of pro-democracy protesters confronted Hong Kong police late on Sunday, stepping up their movement for democratic reforms after being camped out on the city’s streets for more than two months.
“Surround the government,” Nathan Law, a leading member of the Hong Kong Federation of Students, said from a podium in the Admiralty protest camp where thousands of people had gathered.
The UK and China have been seeking to repair ties, which have been strained since Cameron met the Dalai Lama, Tibet’s spiritual leader, in 2012. The British government is also conducting an urgent inquiry into the use of UK-made teargas by the Hong Kong police in light of renewed and violent clashes in the former UK colony. British teargas was used by Hong Kong police against demonstrators on 28 September, ministers have confirmed.
A total of 24 people surrendered for “taking part in an unauthorised assembly”, the Hong Kong government said in a statement. “Police will conduct follow-up investigations based on the information provided,” it said.
“There’s no room for demands like ours in the French framework,” Mr. Simeoni said.
The 18-year-old activist, who leads a student group called Scholarism, wants open elections for Hong Kong's next leader, but Beijing has said Hong Kong may only hold elections if candidates are nominated by a small committee. 
The political battle comes with a legal one. On Monday a Spanish supreme court judge will decide whether to release Catalan cabinet members so that they can run in the election. The ministers are currently in custody accused of sedition, rebellion and misuse of public funds, all of which they deny. Pro-independence activists have launched a “yellow-ribbon” campaign in support for what they describe as political prisoners.
The leaders of two organizations that support the independence bid were also ordered to remain in custody, with the judge saying they might provoke more violence in Catalonia.
Mr. Puigdemont and other separatists are waging a high-stakes battle with the Spanish government over independence, touched off by an Oct. 1 referendum that the Spanish government says should never have taken place because it violated Spain’s Constitution.
The sight of peaceful, sober-minded pro-democracy leaders among the 209 people arrested during the clearance of the camp embodied a volatile new current in Hong Kong politics, said Fernando Cheung, a democracy supporter who is a member of the city’s Legislative Council. Many of those arrested, such as Martin Lee, the founding chairman of the city’s Democratic Party and a Queen’s Counsel of the British bar, were neither radicals nor given to confronting the police, he said.
The governments in Hong Kong and Beijing must demonstrate clear understanding of what drove so many to protest so long. 
Shum, who became an officer of the Chinese University of Hong Kong’s student union in 2013, and deputy secretary general of the Hong Kong Federation of Students this spring, says he won’t fret about the prospect of being blacklisted.
This Monday edition of CNN Student News features topics related to geography, science, history, international politics and character. We cover a volcanic eruption in Japan, an Indian mission to Mars, protests in Hong Kong, the study of the brain, and a CNN Hero who's helping meet a hunger for something fresh.
Sierra says he’s weary of so-called identity politics. “My brother is pro-independence but none of the rest of my family is,” he says. “We’ve stopped talking about politics to avoid problems. I don’t know if I feel more Spanish or Catalan but I know for certain I feel like I’m from Barcelona, and from Cornellà.”
6 Chinese companies “have made efforts to improve their environmental practices where they have felt it necessary to do so, in order to avoid problems with governments and communities.” Ellis cites new technology by company Bosai to address dust problems caused by bauxite mining in Guyana as one example, and ten “environmental protection projects oriented toward wastewater, dust and air pollution” at the Marcona mine in Peru as another.
