This figure includes the handsome fees paid to lawyers and bankers that help Russian companies float on the London stock exchange: 53 Russian companies have a listing on the main stockmarket here, including the state energy giant Gazprom and Russia's largest bank Sberbank. A further 15 Russian companies are listed on the smaller Alternative Investment Market. But Russian company listings peaked before the financial crisis. Data from Dealogic shows that 11 Russian companies gained a prestigious London listing in 2007; last year that had dwindled to just one – the bank and credit card company TCS, which raised $1bn when it floated in October. If the financial spigots of the City of London were turned off, it would be Russia that has the most to lose: since 2002 Russian companies have raised $406bn on London's capital markets. While these loans and bonds generate healthy interest rates for the international banks headquartered in London, few think the City would struggle without them.
The back-and-forth comes as Russian President Vladimir Putin pushes Russian businessmen to "de-offshore" companies owned abroad.
Another City financier, who has been involved in deals conducted by some of London's most high-profile Russian oligarchs, said: "I don't think there was lots of Russian money deposited here. Russians will not necessarily use London banks when Switzerland is good for that. Russian family offices [that manage private Russian wealth from London] will be moving money out, but that would have been done immediately. Property, which a lot of Russians do have in London, is less liquid.
However, in a telephone conversation with President Barack Obama Friday night, Russian President Vladimir Putin once again reportedly raised concerns about ethnic Russians living in eastern Ukraine.  
Barack Obama urged Russian president Vladimir Putin to pull his troops back from the border with Ukraine during an hour-long phone call Friday. The Russian leader, who initiated the call, asserted that Ukraine's government is allowing extremists to intimidate civilians with impunity. Ukraine denies the allegations.
The general, who has been co-ordinating Nato's response to the crisis in Ukraine, warned of further aggression by the Russian president, Vladimir Putin.
