Still don’t understand the groundbreaking discovery? We asked scientists to break it down so that even a five-year-old could understand
If you didn’t fully grasp Thursday’s blockbuster announcement that scientists had detected gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric of spacetime that were first anticipated by Albert Einstein a century ago, you were not alone.
We asked a few experts to explain it to us – to really break it down in its simplest terms – as though we were children. And if you can do any better, offer your explanation in the comments.
Daniel Holz, University of Chicago physicist
When you drop your toy dog and it falls to the floor, that’s gravity pulling it down, the gravity of the Earth. You can’t see it, you can’t feel it, but it’s there. In the universe far away, black holes have a lot more gravity than the Earth’s. The gravity is so strong that even light, like from your flashlight, falls in it and can’t get out. And these black holes move around a lot in space. When they crash into each other, they send out huge waves that tell the universe what just happened.
There was this pretty clever guy 100 years ago who said this is happening all the time. But we didn’t know for sure until we finally managed to build a machine – like a giant ear – so we could to listen to it.
Vicky Kalogera, professor of physics and astronomy, Northwestern University
Imagine playing your favorite spinning game with your friend, where you hold hands and spin around and around. If you pull each other as you spin you might crash into each other and fall.
Stars are like balls flying around in the universe and when they get very old they turn black, and they become black holes. But even if they’re old they might still like to play the spinning game – and, like you and your friend, they might also crash into each other. If they do crash into each other, it’s like you and your friend jumping into the lake. It makes a huge splash and then ripples spread out all across the lake, right to the edge.
Fulvio Melia, professor of physics, mathematics and astronomy, University of Arizona
When a large boat bobs up and down on the ocean, smaller objects floating around it, like a lifesaver or a water bottle, go up and down too, right?
So, space is like the ocean and all the planets, stars and galaxies are like boats and objects sitting on its surface. Even though we can’t feel it, there are waves in space that make the Earth bob every so slightly. Those waves are caused by gravity.
Think of gravity like a magnet, and everything in space has it. The bigger the object, the stronger the magnet. The sun is really big – big enough to attract the Earth, and the Earth attracts the moon, and because of gravity, they’re all attracted to each other. It’s like they all want to hug and be close. But they can’t, so they send out little waves instead.
It’s been hard for us to measure these waves, until recently two dying stars sent out such huge waves in the last moments of their lives that we were finally able to.
Brian Lantz, senior research scientist at Stanford University
If you put two heavy bowling balls on a trampoline, the trampoline will bend downwards under each ball and the balls will start rolling around and move towards each other as they fall into each other’s dent. The heavy balls stretch the trampoline (that’s why they create dents), and, in space, black holes stretch the universe in the same way.
OK, now imagine that when the bowling balls meet they create a big explosion. A really powerful one. That’s what we finally figured out - we were able to measure the explosion, too.