It seems likely that the detection of gravitational waves will earn somebody an Nobel prize. But an army of scientists was involved. Who will it be?
Three men who forged the instrument that testified to the dance of two black holes as they waltzed around each other at more than half the speed of light have become instant stars of world science and could become Nobel laureates.
Even though the discovery grew from five decades of sophisticated research, a vast body of theoretical predictions, an army of astronomers and astrophysicists who framed the questions, a set of advanced supercomputer simulations and the patience and perfectionism of a whole generation of experimenters and engineers, in brief poll of physicists, three names were cited instantly.
Gravitational waves: breakthrough discovery after a century of expectation Read more
These are Rainer Weiss of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Kip Thorne and Ronald Drever of the California Institute of Technology, the three founders of Ligo, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory in the US.
“They are what is known as The Troika. It’s this wonderful story. It is these three. These are the three guys who did it,” said Pedro Ferreira, a physicist at Oxford and author of The Perfect Theory, a book that celebrates the centenary of Einstein’s theory of general relativity.
“These are the three guys who did the groundwork, and in the next 25 years developed the stuff, convinced the National Science Foundation to fund them, and pushed it forward,” he said. “It’s difficult, because there are all these other people who have been working on it. I have a very romantic view that these three guys should have it – but it may be unfair.”
All physicists questioned invoked at least two of the three names in the troika as potential Nobel laureates. Utah-born Kip Thorne is named in Hawking’s book A Brief History of Time as the other gambler in a famous bet with Hawking about whether black holes would ever be observed. He is a theorist who explored the notional structure and topography of black holes, and worked out the mechanisms for wormholes in space that might permit time travel.
The Berlin-born Rainer Weiss was one of the intellects behind Nasa’s cosmic microwave background experiment that detected the tiny fluctuations in the temperature of intergalactic space in the 1990s, and an experimenter who introduced laser interferometry to gravitational wave observation. Ronald Drever, for many years at Caltech, co-invented the mechanism for stabilising the Ligo laser and then returned to his native Scotland: sadly, he was too ill to attend the press event that celebrated the announcement on Thursday.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Why discovering gravitational waves changes everything – video
Between them, they delivered an instrument so sensitive that it could detect a variation smaller than the nucleus of an atom over a length of four kilometres.
But the success of Ligo also rested on contributions from – to name a few - astronomers in Australia, mathematicians in Moscow, scientists in Birmingham, Glasgow and Cardiff, and expert groups in Italy and in Germany. “There are plenty of other prizes,” said Neil Turok, of the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics in Waterloo, Canada.
“To me it’s inconceivable that Ligo won’t sweep the board with these prizes. I have enormous confidence in the Nobel committee: they are very serious and thorough and I am confident they will do a great job of apportioning credit. It seems fairly clear – and I am an outsider – that the key players were Rainer Weiss at MIT and Ron Drever at Caltech: they were the experimentalists who invented a number of ingenious tricks to reduce the noise and increase the sensitivity of the instrument to these astonishing levels.”
These, he said, were the experimental geniuses without whom nothing would have been possible.
“I call experimentalists real people. Theorists are imaginary people. We dream up the ideas, hopefully provoke the experimentalists into measuring things but it is only when they are measured that we can claim we understand what is going on.”