Japan’s finance minister says calm returning but signals readiness to intervene over rising yen, while analysts point to signs a UK recession is being priced in
Timeline Eight key moments in the Catalan independence campaign Show Hide Spain’s constitutional court strikes down parts of a 2006 charter on Catalan autonomy that had originally increased the region’s fiscal and judicial powers and described it as a “nation”. The court rules that using the word “nation” has no legal value and also rejects the “preferential” use of Catalan over Spanish in municipal services. Almost two weeks later, hundreds of thousands protest on the streets of Barcelona, chanting “We are a nation! We decide!” At the height of Spain’s economic crisis, more than a million people protest in Barcelona on Catalonia’s national day, demanding independence in what will become a peaceful, annual show of strength. The pro-independence government of Artur Mas defies the Madrid government and Spain’s constitutional court by holding a symbolic vote on independence. Turnout is just 37%, but more than 80% of those who voted - 1.8 million people - vote in favour of Catalan sovereignty. Carles Puigdemont, who has replaced Mas as regional president, announces an independence referendum will be held on 1 October. Spain’s central government says it will block the referendum using all the legal and political means at its disposal. The Catalan parliament approves referendum legislation after a heated, 11-hour session that sees 52 opposition MPs walk out of the chamber in Barcelona in protest at the move. Spain’s constitutional court suspends the legislation the following day, but the Catalan government vows to press ahead with the vote. Police arrest 14 Catalan government officials suspected of organising the referendum and announce they have seized nearly 10 million ballots destined for the vote. Some 40,000 people protest against the police crackdown in Barcelona and Puigdemont accuses the Spanish government of effectively suspending regional autonomy and declaring a de facto state of emergency. Close to 900 people are injured as police attempt to stop the referendum from taking place. The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%. Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic. Spanish prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, fires regional president, Carles Puigdemont, and orders regional elections to be held on 21 December.
Britain’s decision to leave the EU continued to reverberate around the financial markets as several Asian governments prepared stimulus packages and some analysts warned that global markets were bracing for a full-blown recession in the UK.
Days after the UK referendum result wiped almost 8% off Japanese shares and sent the yen up sharply against the US dollar, officials in Tokyo have started drawing up plans to minimise Brexit’s impact on the world’s third-biggest economy.
UK loses triple-A credit rating after Brexit vote Read more
The economy minister, Nobuteru Ishihara, said on Tuesday that stimulus measures were likely to include assistance for small businesses.
“There are concerns about lessening the impact of the British referendum on Japan’s small and medium-sized companies,” Ishihara said.
Sources said the government was willing to spend at least 10tn yen ($98bn) due to worries about exports, domestic demand and Japanese firms operating in Britain.
The Japanese finance minister, Taro Aso, said on Tuesday that financial markets were calmer but stressed the need to keep a close watch on currency markets and said he stood ready to respond if necessary.
South Korea’s government said on Tuesday it would propose a supplementary budget shield of around 10 trillion won ($8.44bn), with Brexit turmoil as well as domestic risks seen as weighing on its decision-making.
The Chinese premier, Li Keqiang, said on Tuesday that the government would not allow “rollercoaster rides and drastic changes in the capital markets” in the wake of Brexit turmoil that took the yuan to five and a half year lows.
Li, speaking at the World Economic Forum (WEF) in the city of Tianjin, said China hoped for a united and stable EU and a prosperous United Kingdom, but added: “Against the backdrop of globalisation, it’s impossible for each country to talk about its own development discarding the world economic environment.”
The British prime minister, David Cameron, insisted on Monday that Britain’s vote to leave the European Union would not send the economy into a tailspin, even as Standard & Poor’s stripped the UK of its top credit rating.
Hours after he spoke Standard & Poor’s knocked the UK’s sovereign rating by two notches, from AAA to AA, saying an exit would lead to a “less predictable, stable and effective policy framework in the UK”.
Cameron, who is resigning as prime minister over the EU referendum outcome, will travel to Brussels on Tuesday to discuss the Brexit vote with Europe’s leaders.
Cameron will meet the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, and the European council president, Donald Tusk, before a working dinner with his counterparts from the 27 other member states, at which the verdict in Thursday’s historic referendum will be the only item on the agenda.
The UK’s challenge to build a clean, secure and affordable energy system has become significantly harder amid the political and economic turmoil following the nation’s vote to leave the European Union.
With ageing, dirty power plants closing down, the UK needs to invest about £20bn a year between now and 2020, according to the National Infrastructure Commission, making up 60% of all infrastructure spending. Energy really matters, powering the economy both literally and financially. But the political risks have spiked after the Brexit vote, as have the financial risks and uncertainty about access to markets.
“It is vital the UK retains access to the IEM, which provides stability for energy companies and helps keep household bills down,” said a spokeswoman. “UK energy security depends on gas and electricity from the IEM and it is essential therefore that we take no risks with that. The issue of energy needs to be treated with the highest importance by the government as the negotiations on Britain’s exit begin.”
SSE, one of the UK’s big six energy companies, agreed. “The UK government should be mindful of the importance the harmonisation of the [UK] energy market with the countries in Europe can have on efforts to deliver clean, secure and affordable energy. Collaboration with other European countries on energy matters is important for UK consumers,” it said in a statement.
The costs of reduced collaboration could be high, according to research by Vivid Economics, published ahead of the vote: “The potential impacts resulting from exclusion from the IEM could be up to £500m per year by the early 2020s.” The analysts said further costs would come from investors demanding higher returns as the risks to projects rise.
Before the referendum, energy and climate change secretary Amber Rudd warned of an “electric shock” from Brexit, citing the Vivid report. The boss of Centrica, which owns British Gas, agreed: “The probability is that our customers in the UK will see higher energy costs [with an exit].”
The political uncertainty now present is starkly illustrated by the diametrically opposed views of Rudd’s deputy minister, Andrea Leadsom. Brexit was a “superb result” for the UK, she said. Leadsom said freedom from EU laws on state aid would benefit UK bill payers, though how looser rules on subsidies would achieve that is unclear. Michael Gove, another leading Brexiter, said the 5% VAT charged on energy could be cut.
However, virtually all energy industry observers have a negative outlook for the UK’s post-EU energy system. Prof Paul Younger, at the University of Glasgow, said the vote to leave “blasts a hole” in the embryonic EU energy union, which would provide a huge market for the UK’s large offshore wind and tidal resources, as well as smooth out the intermittency of rising renewable energy.
Nina Skorupska, at the Renewable Energy Association, said: “The result raises serious questions. Energy policy must be a priority for the government now, with industry needing reassurance and clarity on priorities. The first must be confirmation of the 5th carbon budget, which will hopefully give some confidence in the long-term direction of UK energy policy.” Under UK law, the government has until Thursday to accept or reject the latest carbon-cutting proposals from its own climate advisers.
The chancellor George Osborne warned on Monday that the impact of the Brexit vote was already being felt: “It is already evident that some firms are continuing to pause their decisions to invest.” A survey of its members by the business group the Institute of Directors found one in five were considering moving some UK operations abroad.
The plant is an important part of the UK government’s plan to keep the lights on and emissions down, but is at high risk from a change of leadership, said energy analyst Nick Butler: “Osborne has been a powerful supporter of new nuclear. He has tolerated both a sharp rise in costs, even at a time when the price of every other form of energy has been falling, and successive delays that leave the project years behind schedule and billions of pounds over budget. On the assumption that he joins David Cameron in retiring in three months time, his successor may take a tougher line and pursue different options.”
Jonathan Grant, director at consultants PwC, said: “Many supporters of Brexit [are] also opposed to climate policies such as carbon taxes and efficiency standards.”
EDF claims Brexit does not affect their plans, but other big clean energy players have expressed worries. “We still want to grow in the UK, particularly in wind power, but clearly a significant change like an exit from the EU introduces more risk to the sector for an unforeseen period of time,” said a spokesman for Vattenfall. SSE said political risk had risen.
“Business really hates uncertainty,” said Nick Molho, at the Aldersgate Group. But he said the global surge in clean energy and action on climate change provided very strong reasons for the UK follow suit, even from outside the EU.
“In 2015, the international market for low-carbon goods and services was already worth $5.5tn and this has continued to grow since the successful climate change summit in Paris in December,” he said. “It is in the UK’s interest to continue growing its low-carbon economy, a sector that was worth over £46bn in 2014 and was already employing over 238,000 people directly. The low-carbon economy may fare better [than others] if the government commits to its own targets - the UK is a pretty big market.”
Jonathan Gaventa, from thinktank E3G, said that legal EU targets for renewable energy for 2020 had been a major catalyst for investment, but that the bloc’s 2030 target is not nationally binding: “So current UK renewable energy investment is driven by the underlying need for clean energy in the UK. This need does not change.”
Prof Rob Gross, at Imperial College London, said one thing was certain: “What seems incontrovertible is that in the energy arena, as in so many parts of the economy which are exposed to external trade, victory for Leave creates uncertainty, risks instability, weakens the UK’s negotiating position and, at least in the short term, discourages investment.”Virgin billionaire says ‘thousands and thousands’ of jobs will be lost following the decision to leave the EU
Virgin billionaire, Sir Richard Branson, says Chinese business partners are already pulling investment from the UK in the light of the EU referendum vote, and warned that “thousands of jobs will be lost”.
Speaking at the final round of Voom, a competition for young entrepreneurs hoping to secure funding and support from Virgin, Branson warned that the business climate after the Brexit vote was already hurting the economy.
He said his opinion that leaving the EU would damage investment in Britain was shared by “every single person I’ve met from overseas”.
Branson, whose business empire includes airline Virgin Atlantic and home broadband and TV provider Virgin Media, blamed pro-Brexit politicians for causing chaos in global markets, accusing them of misleading the public. Branson also has a stake in Virgin Money, which has suffered a 40% slump in its shares since the referendum.
“Businesspeople do not want politicians to completely and utterly wreck the hard work they’ve done for years and years and that is effectively what happened,” Branson said.
“The sad thing is I really think Brexiters were misled and did not realise. People said it was scaremongering. It wasn’t scaremongering and the last 48 hours have proved that.”
Earlier in the week, Branson, who campaigned for the UK to remain in the EU, called on the government to consider holding a second referendum, “based on the misrepresentations made by the leave campaign”.
The entrepreneur does not have the right to vote in UK elections because he lives in the British Virgin Islands, but has weighed in on the Brexit debate, pointing out that he employs 50,000 people in the UK.The financial markets continued to pummel stocks and the value of the British pound, at one point sending the currency to its lowest level against the dollar in more than three decades. And Standard & Poor’s, the ratings agency, downgraded Britain’s credit rating, reflecting concern about the economic implications of the so-called Brexit vote.
Mr. Cameron has announced that he will step down, and both his governing Conservative Party and the opposition Labour Party were consumed by internal warfare on Monday, leaving the country lacking strong leadership as it confronted new demands for a referendum on independence for Scotland.
In the first meeting of Parliament since the referendum, Mr. Cameron said he considered the vote binding, though he reiterated that he would leave to his successor the decision to start the formal withdrawal process. “The decision must be accepted and the process of implementing the decision in the best possible way must now begin,” he said.
About three-quarters of lawmakers had supported remaining in the European Union. A senior Conservative lawmaker, Kenneth Clarke, suggested that Parliament could override the referendum — which is not, in the end, legally binding on the government — while a Labour legislator, David Lammy, called for a second referendum.
Mr. Johnson also played down the central issue of the campaign, immigration, saying it was not really what Britons were voting on, despite considerable evidence that it was.
But there were no signs that European leaders would let Britain off the hook so easily. Although Ms. Merkel has signaled a desire not to rush the process of negotiating British withdrawal, most European governments are eager to take a tough line, wanting to make clear to any other nation that might contemplate leaving that there is considerable cost to doing so.
The few countries that have been given access to the European free-trade zone without joining the European Union — notably, Iceland, Norway and Switzerland — all contribute to the bloc’s budget and accept its bedrock principle of free movement of workers, the very issues that angered so many of the Britons who voted to leave.
Meeting in Berlin, Ms. Merkel, President François Hollande of France and Prime Minister Matteo Renzi of Italy said there would be no discussions, formal or informal, over Britain’s withdrawal until it formally invokes Article 50, the provision in the bloc’s governing treaty that sets out the process for a withdrawal.
Alex Salmond, a member of Parliament and a former leader of the Scottish National Party, blamed the British government for the political vacuum, saying that neither Mr. Cameron nor Mr. Johnson had taken ownership of the mess. “If you break it, you own it,” he said.
Mr. Cameron summoned his cabinet and announced the creation of a policy unit of the “best and brightest” civil servants — overseen by Oliver Letwin, a Conservative lawmaker — to orchestrate the withdrawal process. He also said he had spoken with Prime Minister Enda Kenny of Ireland to ensure that a British departure from the European Union, of which Ireland is a member, would not endanger the fragile peace in Northern Ireland.
Meanwhile, the opposition Labour Party found itself in a state of civil war, with veteran lawmakers calling for the resignation of its leader, Jeremy Corbyn, and warning that the party risked losing its position as one of Britain’s two main political parties, a status it has held since 1922.
Large numbers of voters in traditional Labour strongholds in Northeast England and Wales — many of which are economically depressed areas that receive large amounts of European Union aid — voted to leave the bloc.
Mr. Corbyn’s tepid approach to campaigning for the Remain campaign was cited as a reason many traditional Labour supporters threw in their lot with the nationalist, anti-European U.K. Independence Party.
Secretary of State John Kerry, visiting Brussels and London to discuss the fallout from the referendum, counseled against harsh actions by either side.
“So I think it is absolutely essential that we stay focused on how, in this transitional period, nobody loses their head, nobody goes off half-cocked, people don’t start ginning up scatterbrained or revengeful premises, but we look for ways to maintain the strength that will serve the interests and the values that brought us together in the first place,” Mr. Kerry said.Of European parliament members: "They don't like me. It's mutual," he says
(CNN) Nigel Farage, the man who helped orchestrate the United Kingdom's pending exit from the European Union, said in a nearly 10-minute interview with CNN's Richard Quest Tuesday that it's time to "stop the silliness" and get down to work.
Fresh off the boos and turned backs that greeted his appearance at the European Council earlier in the day, Farage said warnings of economic chaos following the vote won't come to pass, but suggested even if they do, it would be worth it.
"Freedom, independence, democracy, not being a slave to somebody else is something on which you can't put a price," he said. "And what we did last Thursday is we voted to take back our country, to take back our laws, our courts, our borders, our pride and our self-respect."
Farage, a member of the European parliament since 1999, derided his fellow members who booed him Tuesday when he spoke at the Council meeting in Brussels, the first since U.K. voters approved the exit referendum.
U.K. Treasury chief George Osborne has no doubts: Britain will "absolutely" have to cut spending and raise taxes following its vote to leave the European Union.
"We are absolutely going to have to provide fiscal security to people," he said. "In other words, we're going to have to show the country and the world that the government can live within its means."
The chancellor of the exchequer said ahead of the vote that an emergency budget would be needed to fill a "black hole" of about £30 billion ($42.6 billion) per year if the U.K. left the EU.
Critics dismissed the warning, and accused the Treasury official of running a campaign based on fear. On Tuesday, Osborne said that specific decisions on future austerity would be left to the next prime minister.
Osborne was once viewed as a possible successor to Prime Minister David Cameron, but he has ruled himself out as a replacement.
Richard Branson, the billionaire founder of Virgin Group, said his company had ditched a planned acquisition after the U.K. voted last Thursday to leave the European Union.
A Virgin spokesperson said the group had been looking to buy a company employing 3,000 people, but the deal would now not go ahead.
"The Virgin Group is concerned by the ongoing instability and this will impact new expansion in the next few years in the U.K.," the spokesperson said.
Branson is one of Britain's most successful entrepreneurs, worth an estimated $4.8 billion. But his company has been hit hard by the fallout since the EU referendum. A record $3 trillion was wiped off global stocks on Friday and Monday.
"I suspect we've lost a third of our value, which is dreadful to people in the workplace," he said.
Other parts of the company face new challenges because of Brexit. Virgin Atlantic may suffer because the vote puts at risk its access to EU aviation agreements with the U.S.
Branson has been deeply critical of the vote to quit the EU, saying it has fractured the country more than any other event in recent memory.
Could the U.K. hold another Brexit vote?
The Virgin Group CEO campaigned against Brexit. He wants a second vote on the issue, saying the public have realized they were misled and might change their view.
Nearly 4 million people have signed a petition calling for a new referendum. Parliament should consider it, Branson said.
The drop comes in the wake of the U.K.'s decision to leave the European Union. The historic vote sent the yield on the U.S. 10-year Treasury, which serves as benchmark for consumer loans, tumbling to 1.45% this week.
The rate on the 15-year fixed mortgage also dropped to 2.78% from 2.83% last week.
"Obviously it's a good time for anyone who is the market for a home purchase or had been on the proverbial fence about refinancing," said Mark Hamrick, senior economic analyst at Bankrate.
Some experts expect the fallout from the vote to be a boon for the U.S. real estate market as more foreign buyers seek out a safe haven to park their cash.
But this vote was also a rejection by my fellow countrymen, from my parents’ generation to mine, of everything I cherished about Europe, Britain and my own childhood: the sense that our differences were less important than our shared experiences. We could travel across an old and cultured Continent, have access to jobs in 27 other countries, and make friends from all over.
First, it has served as a wake-up call for British youth. Democracies are about rights and responsibilities. But my generation failed to turn up. Only 36 percent of eligible voters ages 18 to 24 and 58 percent of those 25 to 34 went to the polls, compared with more than 80 percent of eligible voters 55 and older. If we want our world to reflect our values and beliefs, we are going to have to engage and vote.
Second, this was a reminder that we live in an era when political campaigns spread much disinformation, often through the news and social media. Throughout the referendum campaign, the Leave camp engaged in scaremongering, particularly about immigration and offered false promises about a financial windfall.
It promised that a decision to leave the European Union would enable Britain to swiftly reduce immigration from other parts of Europe. A windfall of 350 million pounds a week, or about $462 million, in British contributions to the bloc could be redirected to the National Health Service. Yet hours after their victory, Leave campaigners were retreating from both claims.
How, I ask myself, did so many people believe these promises, and why was there not more pushback from my generation? Where was Generation Y?
Democracies can survive, and thrive, when communities connect. There has to be a collective sense that we are in this together. This has clearly eroded in Britain and across Europe. But with this vote, we all stand to lose something. We let down our European family. We closed the door on opportunities.
I want future generations to have the same opportunities I have had. To enjoy the richness of diverse and integrated cultures. To build friendships across borders. This vote has been, for me, a call to action. It has been a valuable lesson to recognize that I need to participate, communicate and connect with others, just as my parents and grandparents did.Seizing on a policy pushed by Scottish Labour, the first minister said power from the publicly owned energy company would be sold as cheaply as possible.
The Scottish government, led by the Scottish National Party, says this is a "once in a generation opportunity" for Scotland's people to take control of the decisions that affect them most. A "yes" vote means that "Scotland's future will be in Scotland's hands," it says, and that life will be better and fairer for its people.
“Love him or loathe him — and many people do — it is simply a fact that we would not have had the referendum vote, nor have won it, without him,” said Gawain Towler, a longtime ally and spokesman for UKIP.
Since Britain’s shock vote to exit the EU two weeks ago, investors have been consoling themselves with the expectation of yet more policy easing from the major central banks.
• People who otherwise agree on very little — like Nigel Farage, one of the foremost advocates of a British exit from the bloc, or “Brexit,” and Andy Burnham, a senior Labour Party lawmaker — have called on the government to clarify the status of these Europeans. Ms. Leadsom said on Tuesday that Europeans living in Britain should not be used as “bargaining chips.”
Italian banks have been choking on bad debt for years, but the U.K. vote has thrown their problems into sharp relief. Here's how Brexit could turn Italy into Europe's next crisis:
The British referendum on June 23 plunged the European Union into crisis. It left Britain rudderless as the pound sank in value and both the governing and opposition parties engaged in fierce and acrimonious leadership battles. Mr. Cameron, who had supported remaining in the European Union, said after the referendum that he would resign once the governing Conservatives selected a new leader, a process that he had expected to last until September but that was drastically accelerated on Monday.
On Monday she said more about her wider political agenda in a speech that offered plans to address some of the economic and social inequalities evident in Britain. Those include populist resentments thought to have motivated many pro-Brexit voters in economically depressed areas outside London and in the affluent southeast of England.
Despite being part of the Remain camp in the run-up to the referendum, May will push ahead with the UK's divorce from Europe -- "Brexit means Brexit," she said in typically no-nonsense style.
While Scotland voted to remain part of the UK in 2014, with 55% of people voting against independence, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon has now said another independence referendum could be on the table following Brexit.
“Consumers in post-Brexit Britain are reporting higher levels of concern this month,” said Joe Staton, head of market dynamics at GfK. “We’ve seen a very significant drop in confidence, as is clear from the fall in each of our key measures, with the biggest decrease occurring in the outlook for the general economic situation in the next 12 months.
The report follows a clutch of business surveys this week suggesting the vote to leave the EU could derail Britain’s economy following relatively strong economic growth in the run-up to the referendum. GDP was revealed to be up 0.6% in the second quarter, greater than the 0.4% growth seen in the previous three months, but more timely indicators pointed to falling confidence among car factories, high street stores and in the construction industry.
British Airways owner International Airlines Group has reported disappointing profits and lowered its full-year forecast, blaming terror attacks, the Brexit vote and strikes for a downturn in travel.
IAG, which also owns Iberia, Vueling and Aer Lingus, had forecast in February that 2016 profits would rise by 40% to more than €900m (£759m), but is now forecasting a “low double-digit” percent rise. It was quick to warn on profits the day after the Brexit vote, having already suffered weak trading in the runup to the poll on 23 June.
Britain’s decision to leave the EU has triggered a sharp fall in the value of the pound versus the dollar and the euro, making it more expensive for Britons to travel abroad. It has also caused a slump in consumer confidence. The latest poll from market researcher GfK recorded the biggest slide in sentiment for more than 26 years in July.
The company’s share price, which had fallen sharply from 528p on the day of the EU referendum, was up by about 1.5% on Friday morning, at 416p.
IAG posted an operating profit before one-off items of €555m in the second quarter, up from €530m a year earlier, but less than the €562m predicted by analysts. The group took a currency hit of €148m in the quarter, mainly due to the weak pound, as it reports results in euros. Traditionally, the second quarter is the most profitable part of the year.
The company has scaled back expansion plans for the next six months and is reviewing ideas for capacity growth and spending next year.
Willie Walsh, the IAG chief executive, said: “Numerous external factors affected our airlines, including the impact of terrorism, uncertainty around the UK’s EU referendum and Spain’s political situation, and increased weakness in Latin American economies. This led to a softer than expected trading environment, especially in June. In addition, the airlines’ operations have been considerably disrupted by 22 air traffic control strikes in Europe so far this year. This has impacted our passenger revenues.”
