Britain’s decision to leave the EU continued to reverberate around the financial markets as several Asian governments prepared stimulus packages and some analysts warned that global markets were bracing for a full-blown recession in the UK.
Timeline Eight key moments in the Catalan independence campaign Show Hide Spain’s constitutional court strikes down parts of a 2006 charter on Catalan autonomy that had originally increased the region’s fiscal and judicial powers and described it as a “nation”. The court rules that using the word “nation” has no legal value and also rejects the “preferential” use of Catalan over Spanish in municipal services. Almost two weeks later, hundreds of thousands protest on the streets of Barcelona, chanting “We are a nation! We decide!” At the height of Spain’s economic crisis, more than a million people protest in Barcelona on Catalonia’s national day, demanding independence in what will become a peaceful, annual show of strength. The pro-independence government of Artur Mas defies the Madrid government and Spain’s constitutional court by holding a symbolic vote on independence. Turnout is just 37%, but more than 80% of those who voted - 1.8 million people - vote in favour of Catalan sovereignty. Carles Puigdemont, who has replaced Mas as regional president, announces an independence referendum will be held on 1 October. Spain’s central government says it will block the referendum using all the legal and political means at its disposal. The Catalan parliament approves referendum legislation after a heated, 11-hour session that sees 52 opposition MPs walk out of the chamber in Barcelona in protest at the move. Spain’s constitutional court suspends the legislation the following day, but the Catalan government vows to press ahead with the vote. Police arrest 14 Catalan government officials suspected of organising the referendum and announce they have seized nearly 10 million ballots destined for the vote. Some 40,000 people protest against the police crackdown in Barcelona and Puigdemont accuses the Spanish government of effectively suspending regional autonomy and declaring a de facto state of emergency. Close to 900 people are injured as police attempt to stop the referendum from taking place. The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%. Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic. Spanish prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, fires regional president, Carles Puigdemont, and orders regional elections to be held on 21 December.
Days after the UK referendum result wiped almost 8% off Japanese shares and sent the yen up sharply against the US dollar, officials in Tokyo have started drawing up plans to minimise Brexit’s impact on the world’s third-biggest economy.
UK loses triple-A credit rating after Brexit vote Read more
“There are concerns about lessening the impact of the British referendum on Japan’s small and medium-sized companies,” Ishihara said.
Sources said the government was willing to spend at least 10tn yen ($98bn) due to worries about exports, domestic demand and Japanese firms operating in Britain.
South Korea’s government said on Tuesday it would propose a supplementary budget shield of around 10 trillion won ($8.44bn), with Brexit turmoil as well as domestic risks seen as weighing on its decision-making.
The Chinese premier, Li Keqiang, said on Tuesday that the government would not allow “rollercoaster rides and drastic changes in the capital markets” in the wake of Brexit turmoil that took the yuan to five and a half year lows.
The British prime minister, David Cameron, insisted on Monday that Britain’s vote to leave the European Union would not send the economy into a tailspin, even as Standard & Poor’s stripped the UK of its top credit rating.
Cameron, who is resigning as prime minister over the EU referendum outcome, will travel to Brussels on Tuesday to discuss the Brexit vote with Europe’s leaders.
Cameron will meet the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, and the European council president, Donald Tusk, before a working dinner with his counterparts from the 27 other member states, at which the verdict in Thursday’s historic referendum will be the only item on the agenda.
The UK’s challenge to build a clean, secure and affordable energy system has become significantly harder amid the political and economic turmoil following the nation’s vote to leave the European Union.
With ageing, dirty power plants closing down, the UK needs to invest about £20bn a year between now and 2020, according to the National Infrastructure Commission, making up 60% of all infrastructure spending. Energy really matters, powering the economy both literally and financially. But the political risks have spiked after the Brexit vote, as have the financial risks and uncertainty about access to markets.
“It is vital the UK retains access to the IEM, which provides stability for energy companies and helps keep household bills down,” said a spokeswoman. “UK energy security depends on gas and electricity from the IEM and it is essential therefore that we take no risks with that. The issue of energy needs to be treated with the highest importance by the government as the negotiations on Britain’s exit begin.”
SSE, one of the UK’s big six energy companies, agreed. “The UK government should be mindful of the importance the harmonisation of the [UK] energy market with the countries in Europe can have on efforts to deliver clean, secure and affordable energy. Collaboration with other European countries on energy matters is important for UK consumers,” it said in a statement.
The costs of reduced collaboration could be high, according to research by Vivid Economics, published ahead of the vote: “The potential impacts resulting from exclusion from the IEM could be up to £500m per year by the early 2020s.” The analysts said further costs would come from investors demanding higher returns as the risks to projects rise.
The political uncertainty now present is starkly illustrated by the diametrically opposed views of Rudd’s deputy minister, Andrea Leadsom. Brexit was a “superb result” for the UK, she said. Leadsom said freedom from EU laws on state aid would benefit UK bill payers, though how looser rules on subsidies would achieve that is unclear. Michael Gove, another leading Brexiter, said the 5% VAT charged on energy could be cut.
However, virtually all energy industry observers have a negative outlook for the UK’s post-EU energy system. Prof Paul Younger, at the University of Glasgow, said the vote to leave “blasts a hole” in the embryonic EU energy union, which would provide a huge market for the UK’s large offshore wind and tidal resources, as well as smooth out the intermittency of rising renewable energy.
Nina Skorupska, at the Renewable Energy Association, said: “The result raises serious questions. Energy policy must be a priority for the government now, with industry needing reassurance and clarity on priorities. The first must be confirmation of the 5th carbon budget, which will hopefully give some confidence in the long-term direction of UK energy policy.” Under UK law, the government has until Thursday to accept or reject the latest carbon-cutting proposals from its own climate advisers.
The chancellor George Osborne warned on Monday that the impact of the Brexit vote was already being felt: “It is already evident that some firms are continuing to pause their decisions to invest.” A survey of its members by the business group the Institute of Directors found one in five were considering moving some UK operations abroad.
“In 2015, the international market for low-carbon goods and services was already worth $5.5tn and this has continued to grow since the successful climate change summit in Paris in December,” he said. “It is in the UK’s interest to continue growing its low-carbon economy, a sector that was worth over £46bn in 2014 and was already employing over 238,000 people directly. The low-carbon economy may fare better [than others] if the government commits to its own targets - the UK is a pretty big market.”
Virgin billionaire says ‘thousands and thousands’ of jobs will be lost following the decision to leave the EU
Virgin billionaire, Sir Richard Branson, says Chinese business partners are already pulling investment from the UK in the light of the EU referendum vote, and warned that “thousands of jobs will be lost”.
Speaking at the final round of Voom, a competition for young entrepreneurs hoping to secure funding and support from Virgin, Branson warned that the business climate after the Brexit vote was already hurting the economy.
“The sad thing is I really think Brexiters were misled and did not realise. People said it was scaremongering. It wasn’t scaremongering and the last 48 hours have proved that.”
Earlier in the week, Branson, who campaigned for the UK to remain in the EU, called on the government to consider holding a second referendum, “based on the misrepresentations made by the leave campaign”.
The entrepreneur does not have the right to vote in UK elections because he lives in the British Virgin Islands, but has weighed in on the Brexit debate, pointing out that he employs 50,000 people in the UK.The financial markets continued to pummel stocks and the value of the British pound, at one point sending the currency to its lowest level against the dollar in more than three decades. And Standard & Poor’s, the ratings agency, downgraded Britain’s credit rating, reflecting concern about the economic implications of the so-called Brexit vote.
Mr. Cameron has announced that he will step down, and both his governing Conservative Party and the opposition Labour Party were consumed by internal warfare on Monday, leaving the country lacking strong leadership as it confronted new demands for a referendum on independence for Scotland.
In the first meeting of Parliament since the referendum, Mr. Cameron said he considered the vote binding, though he reiterated that he would leave to his successor the decision to start the formal withdrawal process. “The decision must be accepted and the process of implementing the decision in the best possible way must now begin,” he said.
About three-quarters of lawmakers had supported remaining in the European Union. A senior Conservative lawmaker, Kenneth Clarke, suggested that Parliament could override the referendum — which is not, in the end, legally binding on the government — while a Labour legislator, David Lammy, called for a second referendum.
Mr. Johnson also played down the central issue of the campaign, immigration, saying it was not really what Britons were voting on, despite considerable evidence that it was.
But there were no signs that European leaders would let Britain off the hook so easily. Although Ms. Merkel has signaled a desire not to rush the process of negotiating British withdrawal, most European governments are eager to take a tough line, wanting to make clear to any other nation that might contemplate leaving that there is considerable cost to doing so.
The few countries that have been given access to the European free-trade zone without joining the European Union — notably, Iceland, Norway and Switzerland — all contribute to the bloc’s budget and accept its bedrock principle of free movement of workers, the very issues that angered so many of the Britons who voted to leave.
Alex Salmond, a member of Parliament and a former leader of the Scottish National Party, blamed the British government for the political vacuum, saying that neither Mr. Cameron nor Mr. Johnson had taken ownership of the mess. “If you break it, you own it,” he said.
Large numbers of voters in traditional Labour strongholds in Northeast England and Wales — many of which are economically depressed areas that receive large amounts of European Union aid — voted to leave the bloc.
Secretary of State John Kerry, visiting Brussels and London to discuss the fallout from the referendum, counseled against harsh actions by either side.
“So I think it is absolutely essential that we stay focused on how, in this transitional period, nobody loses their head, nobody goes off half-cocked, people don’t start ginning up scatterbrained or revengeful premises, but we look for ways to maintain the strength that will serve the interests and the values that brought us together in the first place,” Mr. Kerry said.Of European parliament members: "They don't like me. It's mutual," he says
Fresh off the boos and turned backs that greeted his appearance at the European Council earlier in the day, Farage said warnings of economic chaos following the vote won't come to pass, but suggested even if they do, it would be worth it.
"Freedom, independence, democracy, not being a slave to somebody else is something on which you can't put a price," he said. "And what we did last Thursday is we voted to take back our country, to take back our laws, our courts, our borders, our pride and our self-respect."
Farage, a member of the European parliament since 1999, derided his fellow members who booed him Tuesday when he spoke at the Council meeting in Brussels, the first since U.K. voters approved the exit referendum.
U.K. Treasury chief George Osborne has no doubts: Britain will "absolutely" have to cut spending and raise taxes following its vote to leave the European Union.
"We are absolutely going to have to provide fiscal security to people," he said. "In other words, we're going to have to show the country and the world that the government can live within its means."
The chancellor of the exchequer said ahead of the vote that an emergency budget would be needed to fill a "black hole" of about £30 billion ($42.6 billion) per year if the U.K. left the EU.
Richard Branson, the billionaire founder of Virgin Group, said his company had ditched a planned acquisition after the U.K. voted last Thursday to leave the European Union.
A Virgin spokesperson said the group had been looking to buy a company employing 3,000 people, but the deal would now not go ahead.
"I suspect we've lost a third of our value, which is dreadful to people in the workplace," he said.
Other parts of the company face new challenges because of Brexit. Virgin Atlantic may suffer because the vote puts at risk its access to EU aviation agreements with the U.S.
Branson has been deeply critical of the vote to quit the EU, saying it has fractured the country more than any other event in recent memory.
Could the U.K. hold another Brexit vote?
The Virgin Group CEO campaigned against Brexit. He wants a second vote on the issue, saying the public have realized they were misled and might change their view.
Nearly 4 million people have signed a petition calling for a new referendum. Parliament should consider it, Branson said.
The drop comes in the wake of the U.K.'s decision to leave the European Union. The historic vote sent the yield on the U.S. 10-year Treasury, which serves as benchmark for consumer loans, tumbling to 1.45% this week.
Some experts expect the fallout from the vote to be a boon for the U.S. real estate market as more foreign buyers seek out a safe haven to park their cash.
But this vote was also a rejection by my fellow countrymen, from my parents’ generation to mine, of everything I cherished about Europe, Britain and my own childhood: the sense that our differences were less important than our shared experiences. We could travel across an old and cultured Continent, have access to jobs in 27 other countries, and make friends from all over.
First, it has served as a wake-up call for British youth. Democracies are about rights and responsibilities. But my generation failed to turn up. Only 36 percent of eligible voters ages 18 to 24 and 58 percent of those 25 to 34 went to the polls, compared with more than 80 percent of eligible voters 55 and older. If we want our world to reflect our values and beliefs, we are going to have to engage and vote.
Second, this was a reminder that we live in an era when political campaigns spread much disinformation, often through the news and social media. Throughout the referendum campaign, the Leave camp engaged in scaremongering, particularly about immigration and offered false promises about a financial windfall.
Democracies can survive, and thrive, when communities connect. There has to be a collective sense that we are in this together. This has clearly eroded in Britain and across Europe. But with this vote, we all stand to lose something. We let down our European family. We closed the door on opportunities.
I want future generations to have the same opportunities I have had. To enjoy the richness of diverse and integrated cultures. To build friendships across borders. This vote has been, for me, a call to action. It has been a valuable lesson to recognize that I need to participate, communicate and connect with others, just as my parents and grandparents did.The Scottish government, led by the Scottish National Party, says this is a "once in a generation opportunity" for Scotland's people to take control of the decisions that affect them most. A "yes" vote means that "Scotland's future will be in Scotland's hands," it says, and that life will be better and fairer for its people.
“Love him or loathe him — and many people do — it is simply a fact that we would not have had the referendum vote, nor have won it, without him,” said Gawain Towler, a longtime ally and spokesman for UKIP.
A fierce advocate of leaving the EU, she has already said she would invoke Article 50 as soon as possible.
“Brexit means Brexit,” she said firmly, suggesting that if it falls to her to negotiate a British withdrawal from the European Union, she will, as ever, just get on and deal with it.That would be bad news for banks. "Rate cuts by the ECB could make Italian banks even weaker in the short term," said Jack Allen, an economist at Capital Economics.
The chief executive of JPMorgan (JPM) said before the June 23 referendum he thought Brexit would be a "terrible deal for the British economy." Asked by an Italian newspaper how the European Union should now respond to the vote, Dimon said it must work together to address its weaknesses.
The Brexit vote provides both a reason and an opportunity to enable this democratic decision. The British government should respect the popular vote in the North for European Union membership by bringing forward a referendum on Irish unity. The Irish government, too, should act on this.
Despite being part of the Remain camp in the run-up to the referendum, May will push ahead with the UK's divorce from Europe -- "Brexit means Brexit," she said in typically no-nonsense style.
While Scotland voted to remain part of the UK in 2014, with 55% of people voting against independence, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon has now said another independence referendum could be on the table following Brexit.
Joe Grice, chief economist at the ONS, said there was little evidence that concern about a possible Brexit vote had a negative impact on the economy before the referendum.
“The Brexit vote has put the manufacturing sector’s recovery in jeopardy,” said Lee Hopley, chief economist at EEF.
British Airways owner International Airlines Group has reported disappointing profits and lowered its full-year forecast, blaming terror attacks, the Brexit vote and strikes for a downturn in travel.
IAG, which also owns Iberia, Vueling and Aer Lingus, had forecast in February that 2016 profits would rise by 40% to more than €900m (£759m), but is now forecasting a “low double-digit” percent rise. It was quick to warn on profits the day after the Brexit vote, having already suffered weak trading in the runup to the poll on 23 June.
Willie Walsh, the IAG chief executive, said: “Numerous external factors affected our airlines, including the impact of terrorism, uncertainty around the UK’s EU referendum and Spain’s political situation, and increased weakness in Latin American economies. This led to a softer than expected trading environment, especially in June. In addition, the airlines’ operations have been considerably disrupted by 22 air traffic control strikes in Europe so far this year. This has impacted our passenger revenues.”
