British expats could forfeit their rights to live in Spain if they vote to leave the EU, the Spanish prime minister has warned, saying forgoing free movement rights would be “negative for everyone”.
The so-called special relationship with the United States isn’t providing much comfort to the Brexit side these days; President Obama’s recent admonition to vote no in the referendum enraged many people who believe America should stay out of it and let their country think for itself.
“I have no doubt whatsoever, as I have repeatedly stated, that it would be very negative if the United Kingdom left the European Union. Negative for everybody, for the United Kingdom, for Spain, and for the European Union,” Rajoy told Spanish news agency EFE.
“But, above all, it would be very negative for British citizens: the European Union is based, ever since its foundation, on the principles of freedom of movement of people, goods, services and capitals.”
EU referendum live: Cameron and Corbyn make case for Remain – separately Read more
“If the United Kingdom left the European Union, it would be very negative for everyone and from every perspective.”
British expats in Spain, many of them retired, have expressed concern about access to healthcare after a potential leave vote. UK citizens are entitled to healthcare via the European health insurance card or free health insurance from the Spanish government under EU law, but Spain would not be obliged to continue to offer free healthcare to non-EU citizens.
Rajoy’s comments came after the Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, warned that a pledge by Brexit campaigners’ to enact a points-based immigration system would mean British citizens would face similar barriers to travel and work in Europe.
“It would be unavoidable, inevitable, for us and I think for many of us in Europe to follow the same proposals to implement a points system also in the rest of the European Union,” he told BBC News.
Leave campaigners have argued that new rights for British citizens to live and work in other EU countries could be negotiated after Brexit.
Free movement and its effects on migration to the UK is one of the key issues for voters, according to new polling conducted by Vote Leave, which found almost half of those surveyed said levels of migration from the other 27 EU countries had been bad for the UK, against 26% who thought it had benefited Britain.If you want to have your say on the future of Britain’s role in the EU, you need to be on the electoral register, which means registering to vote. You must make sure you register in the place where you intend to vote – usually using your permanent home address.
The EU remains the most important market for UK goods, so it is possible that any competitive gains from a cheaper pound would be negated by trade barriers in the event of a vote to leave. Much would depend on the size of the depreciation in the pound, whether the depreciation was sustained, and the deal struck with Britain’s former EU partners about access to the single market.
Your report on the consequences of a leave vote (Guerilla campaign mooted, 7 June) quotes a pro-European MP saying “We would have to respect the mandate of the referendum”. But it is quite unclear what that mandate might be, as the referendum question does not specify the range of alternatives to full EU membership should the UK vote to leave. Until parliament has determined whether, for example, it wishes the UK to remain in the European Economic Area, it would be inappropriate for David Cameron to formally notify the EU of the UK’s intention to withdraw from the EU. A leave vote would therefore need to be followed by an emergency debate in parliament from Monday 27 June onwards about the UK’s withdrawal options, where the most likely outcome, as you indicate, would be overwhelming support for the UK to remain in EEA, which would of course outrage hard-line Brexiters in the Conservative party.
Those in favor of walking out of the EU -- the Brexit option -- say European rules stifle U.K. business and leaving would boost the economy. They also say Britain would regain control of its borders and be able to limit immigration.
Vote Leave, the official out campaign, responded to leaks of the plans by accusing the chancellor of breaking seven key Tory pledges on which they were elected last year, and set out a competing vision of a post-Brexit world in which Britain would claw back money from the EU. The campaign group said that parliament would react to an out vote by bringing in legislation to cut VAT on fuel, boost NHS funding and bring in a points-based system for immigration.
The surge of fear lately stems from the so-called Brexit vote. Recent polls are showing that support in Britain for leaving the European Union is on the rise: More voters are backing a departure from the bloc than are opting to stay. If Britain drops out, the future of the European Union could be in doubt, and financial markets would be in for a rough ride.
In the near term, the main risk to Britain’s economy was next week’s referendum, the fund’s directors said. “While recognising that this choice is for UK voters to make and that their decisions will reflect both economic and non-economic factors, directors agreed that the net economic effects of leaving the EU would likely be negative and substantial,” they said in a press release accompanying the report.
The Bank of England, the Institute for Fiscal Studies and the IMF have assessed the long-term economic consequences of Brexit. They suggest an income loss of £3,000 to £5,000 annually per household – once the British economy settles down to its new steady-state five years or so after Brexit. But there are some more immediate financial consequences that have hardly been mentioned in the referendum debate.
According to the British Election Study, the overall vote is pretty evenly split between Brexit and remain, but two thirds of Britain’s minority ethnic voters favour staying in the EU. At first glance that might not appear too surprising, but in a debate that has focused heavily on immigration, what is it that has made a third of minority voters – many of them the descendants of immigrants themselves – lean towards leaving?
Jeremy Cook, chief economist at currency broker WorldFirst, watched sterling plummet throughout the early hours of Friday. He said: “Sterling is in freefall at the moment. It looks like its goose is cooked.” At one point, Cook shouted across the trading room: “It’s fallen into the 30s,”, as the likelihood of a leave vote increased and the pound fell below $1.40.
Although most of Ukraine's business elite have strong ties with Moscow, if the east of the country were to fall under the influence of the Kremlin then Ukraine's billionaires would quickly be overrun by their wealthier and better connected Russian counterparts. "The Ukrainian oligarchs have no political influence over Putin," says Leshchenko. "If the east were to secede, their businesses would be snatched. They would become the small businessmen of a Russian province".
(CNN) Scotland will likely seek independence for a second time this decade after the historic vote for the United Kingdom to leave the European Union, Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said Friday.
“The main impact will be massive disorder in the E.U. system for the next two years,” said Thierry de Montbrial, founder and executive chairman of the French Institute of International Relations. “There will be huge political transition costs, on how to solve the British exit, and the risk of a domino effect or bank run from other countries that think of leaving.”
Anti-immigrant leaflets saying "Leave the EU - no more Polish vermin" were put on cars near a school, local police said, the day after the country voted to leave the European Union
Over the past decade the party appears to have mellowed, eschewing xenophobia, academic commentators suggest. On Monday, the US ambassador in Kiev, Geoffrey Pyatt, said he had been "positively impressed" by Svoboda's evolution in opposition and by its behaviour in the Rada, Ukraine's parliament. "They have demonstrated their democratic bona fides," the ambassador asserted. Svoboda played a leading role in the revolution; 18 of its members were shot dead. Another deputy prime minister in the new government, meanwhile, is Jewish.
The referendum was unusual, because it pitted a government on one side, “Remain,” against a loose coalition on the other, made up of Conservatives, some Labour legislators and U.K. Independence Party supporters. The Leave side never had to hammer out an agreement on how to proceed if it won, said Tony Travers, a professor of government at the London School of Economics.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Theresa May announced her bid to succeed David Cameron as prime minister, saying negotiations to leave the EU should not begin before the end of the year. Photograph: Frantzesco Kangaris/AFP/Getty Images
The second chunk – at that stage, 32% of the population – was diametrically opposed: nationalist in outlook; socially conservative; fearful of globalisation; opposed to multiculturalism; preoccupied by immigration; pessimistic about the future; and very hostile to the EU. For these voters, immigration was far and away the most important issue in the referendum; most of them favoured ending free movement, even if this made Britain worse off. The attitude that most characterised them was “I hardly recognise the country I live in any more”. More than half of them agreed with the statement “If I could wave a magic wand and take the UK back to the 1950s, I would”. Their imperative was to shut out the consequences of globalisation and open markets. These voters were overwhelmingly going to vote leave, regardless of the arguments.
There was no emotional argument for the EU that had any resonance with these voters. For committed remain and leave voters, the decision was often passionately held and part of a wider worldview. For the “hearts v heads” voters it was a pragmatic, often transactional, decision. Like almost everyone else, they were worried about immigration – but the economic implications of Brexit mattered even more. Our challenge was to cut through with hard economic arguments – so that head would trump heart. This is where the campaign failed and the referendum was lost.
In April 2015, when the nascent remain team first looked in detail at the spectrum of attitudes, the “hearts v heads” voters on balance – and mostly with reluctance – came down in favour of remaining in the EU by 55% to 45%. On 23 June 2016 they voted in favour of leaving the EU by about the same margin. Heart won out over head.
Scottish voters are reconsidering their opposition to independence after the Brexit vote, the SNP’s business convener, Derek Mackay, has said, despite a poll that found a majority still favoured being part of the UK outside the EU.
At 62%, almost two-thirds of Scots who took part in last month’s referendum on EU membership voted to remain, prompting the SNP’s leader and Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, to say that the leave result made another vote on Scottish independence highly likely.
The percentage who said they would not vote or did not know increased from 12% to 14% after the Brexit vote, the poll found.
“However, a lot could still change on this front in the coming years. Article 50 has not yet been triggered and once details of the Brexit deal emerge it may alter the context of the independence debate.”
“The prime minister has been very clear that we are going to make a success of Brexit, and the focus now needs to be on collaborative working with the Scottish government as ‘Team UK’ to ensure the best possible deal for Scotland and the rest of the UK.”
The research to map out the campaign to keep Britain in the European Union started more than a year before the referendum. The story it told was more daunting than the voting polls implied. Within the data, it was clear that the axis of British politics was in rotation: a new battle line was emerging, cutting directly across the heartland of both main parties – a division founded in national identity and compounded by the impact of an open, globalised economy.
The arithmetic told us that motivating and mobilising pro-EU voters would be nowhere near enough; we would also need the votes of people whose underlying attitudes meant they would find the leave campaign’s arguments compelling and would be hard to persuade.
The third chunk – 34% of the population – was conflicted. These people were the in-play voters: the primary target for both campaigns in the EU referendum. They were very clear that they didn’t like the EU, and why: uncontrolled immigration, the huge direct cost of membership, too much meddling in our laws and lives. They were torn between the appealing idea of insulating the UK from the pressures of an open world, and fear of the idea of a Britain outside the EU, isolated and alone. They were defined by the attitude that “my heart wants to leave the EU, but my head says it may be too risky”.
Within the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign, the referendum often felt like a battle between a simple lie and a complex truth. The leave campaign seemed to have all the best tunes. “Take back control” was a strong, clear message requiring no explanation. It was demonstrably not true that leaving the EU would give the UK £350m a week to spend on other things like the NHS, but endless repetition of that single number meant people heard it and it struck a chord.
On immigration we had no satisfactory answer. For voters who felt this was the most important issue, nothing came close to the simple appeal of ending free movement from the EU, and that was plainly irreconcilable with remaining a member. The Stronger in Europe campaign tested dozens of arguments, but none had any traction with the key in-play voters. Because of the hearts v heads dynamic, many wanted to believe the leave arguments, and disbelieve those forwarded by remain.
One of the few straightforward ways to try to get across the risks of leaving the EU was to point out the overwhelming weight of opinion among economists, businesses, unions – the reviled “experts”. Research established that “independent experts” were top of the list of people whose opinions the swing voters wanted to hear. It turned out that what they really meant was “independent experts who agree with me”. A poll during the campaign found that while remain voters trusted a wide range of experts and professionals, leave voters didn’t trust anyone.
YouGov said the results represented a move towards the independence option of just 1% since it last asked the question in May.
Fifty-five percent of Scottish voters opted to remain in the UK less than two years ago, with 45% supporting independence, but the SNP has since received a huge boost in support, winning all but three Scottish seats in Westminster at last year’s general election.
Despite YouGov’s findings, the SNP’s business convener Derek Mackay says many voters in Scotland are reconsidering
The YouGov poll found there had been no real shift in opinion towards Scottish independence, with 53% saying they would vote for Scotland to remain in the UK and 47% that they would vote to separate.
“This poll is the latest to demonstrate that many no voters are reconsidering their opposition to independence now that Scotland faces being dragged out of the EU against our will,” Mackay said.
“While Scottish independence has been mooted in the wake of the vote to leave the EU, a new referendum is not currently on the table.
The UK minister Andrew Dunlop said another “divisive constitutional debate” was not what the country wanted.
YouGov’s Matthew Smith said: “One month after the UK’s shock decision to leave the EU, the latest YouGov research in Scotland shows no real shift towards independence.”
The remain argument was more complicated. There is no single verifiable statistic that is evidence for the benefits of membership. The economic case lay in easier trade leading to more jobs, lower prices, stronger growth and higher living standards. Each part of the soundbite “Stronger, safer and better off in Europe” required explanation – and the underlying hostility towards the EU, built up over years, meant that pro-EU arguments met strong scepticism.
Forty-six percent of respondents said they would rather live in a Scotland that was still part of the UK after it had left the EU, compared with 37% who would rather live in an independent Scotland within the EU. The numbers become 55% to 45% once “don’t knows” are removed.
The latest findings also emerged just hours after the SNP’s leader in Westminster, Angus Robertson, said Scotland was “truly on the brink of independence”.
“The arguments for Scotland remaining a part of the UK are just as compelling as they were in 2014, in or out of the EU,” he said.
