Gravitational waves: 'we can hear the universe' – live Read more
Michael S. Turner, a cosmologist at the University of Chicago, noted that astronomers had once referred to the search for gravitational waves as an experiment, not an observatory. “LIGO has earned its ‘O,’ ” he said. “That is, it will be an observatory, getting tens of events per year.”Then there is the experiment. As gravitational waves pass through the Earth (and now we know for sure they must be doing this all the time) they distort distances, compressing them in one direction while stretching them in the perpendicular direction. The experiment measures the ratio of these distances, down to a precision of thousandths of the size of a proton. This achievement, and the scientific discipline required to make sure you are not fooling yourself, is daunting.
Again, this is perhaps especially true when you think that the waves were expected. A “null result” would have been amazingly interesting, and also quite hard to believe. The obvious explanation would be that the experiment just wasn’t working properly, did not in fact have the claimed sensitivity. So preparing the defence against that criticism was a major concern, involving the injection of fake data, lots of double-blind internal secrecy and so on, to make sure that if these ripples were there, LIGO would indeed see them. They were there, and it has seen them. The data, the same wave pattern seen in two detectors, are stunning and totally convincing.
Gravitational waves: everything you need to know Read more
I’d like to draw an analogy with my own research at CERN’s Large Hadron Collider. Before it was discovered in 2012, the Higgs boson was expected by the majority of particle physicists. Many theorists (including Peter Higgs) would have been astonished if it didn’t show up. But when it did, it still had a huge impact, both emotionally and scientifically. Knowing is different from guessing, measuring is different from predicting. In the case of the Higgs, we are now exploring the higher-energy reaches of inner space armed with an understanding of the origins of mass. In the case of gravitational waves, we can now begin to observe the universe in an entirely new way, and it is difficult to predict what we may learn from that.
For example, so-called Dark Energy, which drives the accelerating expansion of the universe, may affect the way gravitational waves travel to Earth from their distant sources, and that means we might get some clues as to what Dark Energy actually is. There may be unexpected sources of gravitational waves out there. Gravitational waves are obviously a lot harder to see than electromagnetic waves – light, radio, microwaves – but if we think how much we have learned from astronomy using ripples in electromagnetic fields, it is impossible not to be thrilled by the prospect of studying the universe using ripples in spacetime itself.
Jon Butterworth is a physics professor at University College London. He is a member of the UCL High Energy Physics group and works on the Atlas experiment at Cern’s Large Hadron Collider. His book Smashing Physics: The Inside Story of the Hunt for the Higgs was published in May 2014Physicists have announced the discovery of gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric of spacetime that were first anticipated by Albert Einstein a century ago.
“We have detected gravitational waves. We did it,” said David Reitze, executive director of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (Ligo), at a press conference in Washington.
The announcement is the climax of a century of speculation, 50 years of trial and error, and 25 years perfecting a set of instruments so sensitive they could identify a distortion in spacetime a thousandth the diameter of one atomic nucleus across a 4km strip of laserbeam and mirror.
“This is transformational,” said Prof Alberto Vecchio, of the University of Birmingham, and one of the researchers at Ligo. “We have observed the universe through light so far. But we can only see part of what happens in the universe. Gravitational waves carry completely different information about phenomena in the universe. So we have opened a new way of listening to a broadcasting channel which will allow us to discover phenomena we have never seen before,” he said.
“This observation is truly incredible science and marks three milestones for physics: the direct detection of gravitational waves, the first detection of a binary black hole, and the most convincing evidence to date that nature’s black holes are the objects predicted by Einstein’s theory.”
The scientists detected their cataclysmic event using an instrument so sensitive it could detect a change in the distance between the solar system and the nearest star four light years away to the thickness of a human hair.
The detector was switched off in January for a further upgrade: astronomers still have to decipher months of material collected in the interval. But – given half a century of frustration in the search for gravitational waves – what they found exceeded expectation: suddenly, in the mutual collapse of two black holes, they could eavesdrop on the violence of the universe.
Prof B S Sathyaprakash, from Cardiff University’s school of physics and astronomy, said: “The shock would have released more energy than the light from all the stars in the universe for that brief instant. The fusion of two black holes which created this event had been predicted but never observed.”
Astronomers have already exploited visible light, the infrared and ultraviolet, radio waves, x-rays and even gamma-rays in their attempt to understand the mechanics of stars, the evolution of the galaxies and the expansion of the universe from an initial big bang 13.8bn years ago.
Thursday’s announcement was the unequivocal first detection ever of gravity waves. The hope is that gravity wave astronomy could start to answer questions not just about the life of stars but their deaths as well: death by collision, death in a black hole, death in some rare stellar catastrophe so fierce that, for a few thousandths of a second, the blast is the brightest thing in the universe.
Even before the Ligo detectors in two US states reopened for business late last year, researchers were confident that a detection would follow swiftly. The announcement came after months of speculation, and decades of theoretical and practical work by an international network of more than a thousand scientists and engineers in Britain, Europe, the US and around the world.
Professor Kip Thorne, of the California Institute of Technology, and one of the founding fathers of Ligo, said that until now, astronomers had looked at the universe as if on a calm sea. All of that had changed.
“The colliding black holes that produced these gravitational waves created a violent storm in the fabric of space and time, a storm in which time speeded up and slowed down, and speeded up again, a storm in which the shape of space was bent in this way and that way,” he said.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Ligo co-founder Rainer Weiss, left, and Kip Thorne, right, hug on stage during a news conference at the National Press Club in Washington. Photograph: Andrew Harnik/AP
Not only had the detector picked up the collision of two enormous black holes across a distance of almost a billion light years of space, it recorded the distinctive “chirp” as the two spiralled towards each other.
The discovery, he said, completes a scientific arc of wonder that began 200 years ago, when the great British scientist Michael Faraday began to puzzle about how action was transmitted across the distance of space; how the sun pulled the Earth around. If the sun moved 10 yards, very suddenly, would the Earth feel the difference?
He reasoned that something must cross space to transmit the force of gravity. Faraday’s reasoning inspired the great British mathematician James Clerk Maxwell to think about how an electric force travelled, and arrive at an understanding of light and a prediction of radio waves.
“Einstein, when he came to write down his theory of gravity, his two heroes were Faraday and Maxwell,” said Turok. “He tried to write down laws of the gravitational field and he wasn’t in the least surprised to discover that his predictions had waves, gravitational waves.”
The Ligo discovery signals a new era in astronomy, he said.
“Just think of radio waves, when radio waves were discovered we learned to communicate with them. Mobile communication is entirely reliant on radio waves. For astronomy, radio observations have probably told us more than anything else about the structure of the universe. Now we have gravitational waves we are going to have a whole new picture of the universe, of the stuff that doesn’t emit light – dark matter, black holes,” he said.
“For me the most exciting thing is we will literally be able to see the big bang. Using electromagnetic waves we cannot see further back than 400,000 years after the big bang. The early universe was opaque to light. It is not opaque to gravitational waves. It is completely transparent.
“So literally, by gathering gravitational waves we will be able to see exactly what happened at the initial singularity. The most weird and wonderful prediction of Einstein’s theory was that everything came out of a single event: the big bang singularity. And we will be able to see what happened.”
• The headline to this article was amended on 12 February 2016. An earlier version said the discovery was a breakthrough after two centuries of expectation. This has been corrected.Just over 100 years after he published his general theory of relativity, scientists have found what Albert Einstein predicted as part of the theory: gravitational waves.
"We have detected gravitational waves. We did it," said David Reitze, executive director of LIGO, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory , which was created to do just what Reitze announced.
Reitze made the announcement Thursday at the National Press Club in Washington surrounded by other LIGO researchers and National Science Foundation head France Cordova.
The gravitational waves -- ripples in space-time -- were created by the merging of two black holes, Reitze said. One black hole had the mass of 29 suns; the other was the equivalent of 36 suns. Each was perhaps 50 kilometers (30 miles) in diameter.
More than a billion years ago -- LIGO estimates about 1.3 billion -- the two collided at half the speed of light. Gravitational waves pass through everything, so the result traveled through the universe for that time before reaching Earth.
The gravitational waves stretched and compressed space around Earth "like Jell-O," said Reitze.
However, the waves are so small that it takes a detector like LIGO, capable of measuring distortions one-thousandth the size of a proton, to observe them. They were observed on September 14, 2015.
Scientists heard the sound of the black holes colliding as a "chirp" lasting one-fifth of a second. Though gravitational waves aren't sound waves, the increase in frequency the collision exhibited in its last milliseconds -- when the black holes were mere kilometers apart and growing closer -- is a frequency we can hear, said Deirdre Shoemaker, a Georgia Tech physicist who works on LIGO.
LIGO is described as "a system of two identical detectors" -- one located in Livingston, Louisiana, the other in Hanford, Washington -- "carefully constructed to detect incredibly tiny vibrations from passing gravitational waves." The project was created by scientists from Caltech and MIT and funded by the National Science Foundation.
Szabolcs Marka, a physicist at Columbia University who is leader of the LIGO member Columbia Experimental Gravity Group, said you could think of it as "a cosmic microphone."
Gravitational waves were predicted by Einstein in his general theory of relativity in 1915, the theory that proposed space-time as a concept. The waves are a distortion of space-time.
However, in order for us to detect them, they needed to be created by a mammoth event -- for example, the collision of two black holes.
Black holes are a holy grail of the gravitational wave concept. To date, we'd been able only to see their aftereffects. Black holes themselves were a conjecture.
"There's been a lot of indirect evidence for their existence," says Shoemaker, an expert in black holes. "But this is the first time we actually detect two black holes merging and we know the only thing that predicts that (is) gravitational radiation, (which) comes from a binary black hole merging. There's no other way we could have seen that but gravitationally."
But is LIGO correct? Have we really detected gravitational waves?
Scientists have what they call a "five-sigma" standard of proof, and LIGO's researchers say the gravitational wave discovery exceeds that.
"It took six months of convincing ourselves that it was correct," says Shoemaker. "It goes beyond that five-sigma to proving that nothing was happening with the equipment that couldn't be understood."
"Imagine having never been able to hear before and all you can do is see," she says. "Now we can listen to the universe where we were deaf before. It's a different spectrum (from the electromagnetic spectrum). It's unlike anything we've ever detected before."
"What's really exciting is what comes next," said Reitze at the announcement. "I think we're opening a window on the universe -- a window of gravitational wave astronomy."
Columbia University physicist Marka, who's been working on the project for more than a decade, said the discovery will open up new horizons, including direct tests of Einstein's general theory. Those could further support it -- or force physicists to come up with new ideas.
Ironically, Einstein didn't think gravitational waves would be discovered.
"He thought gravitational waves are a beautiful construct, but they are so small nobody would ever be able to actually measure it," said Marka.What could be bigger than gravitational waves? Predicted by Einstein, confirmed to exist this week, they are born of black holes colliding and the sound of space time itself warping through the Earth.
Based on Einstein’s theory of general relativity, new tool allows researchers to take into account ripples in spacetime, making the most accurate simulations yet
Dubbed “gevolution”, the tool will for the first time allow researchers to take into account the effect of ripples in spacetime - known as gravitational waves - and could help shed light on dark energy, the mysterious force driving the universe’s accelerated expansion.
While many models of the universe currently exist, simulations are typically based on those built on Newton’s theory of gravity. The new tool, however, is based on Einstein’s theory of general relativity, allowing scientists to create computer simulations based on a far wider range of models. Dr Julian Adamek, one of the paper’s authors now based at the Observatoire de Paris in Meudon, says that offers exciting possibilities. “You can see now a simulation of how spacetime is dragged around - the ‘frame-dragging’ effect - by the movement of matter and also how gravitational waves would be generated by the matter which moves around,” he says.
But not everyone is so enthusiastic. “Einstein’s general relativity is our best description of gravity, but the equations are complicated and expensive to solve - in the sense that it takes a great deal of computer time,” says Dr David Seery from the University of Sussex. “To study growth of structure on cosmological scales we can usually make do with the older Newtonian theory of gravity.” Indeed, while the new tool could offer advantages, Seery believes it has yet to usher forth revelations. “Their computer software is an impressive piece of work, but at this stage the results don’t amount to significant changes in our understanding of the growth of structure.”
However, with large cosmological surveys in the offing, including the European Space Agency’s Euclid satellite, Dunkley believes the simulations will yet prove valuable. “This is really timely because we are just about to embark on this whole wealth of new data - we will need these computer simulations available if we want to learn new physics from the new data that is coming,” she says.
