Ten years ago, when I first started reporting on China’s migrant labour force, they were not hard to spot. Peasant hairstyles, cheap clothes, corralled into concrete dormitories and marched, military style, into and out of the factory. But labour shortages, rising skill levels and better wages have changed the sociology of the Chinese factory. Now it’s spiky hair and, in their leisure time, fast fashion. Though many still live in dorms, taking most of their meals in the factory canteen, since the mid-2000s, many of the industrial districts have had estates of family apartments.
Jean Wang, a Communist Party member from Zhejiang Province on China’s east coast, attended the protest to make a video for her journalism class. It was interesting to see the Hong Kong students exercising their right to protest, she said.
This year, there has been a rash of strikes in the Chinese export industry – headlined by the strike of 30,000 shoe workers at Yue Yuen Industrial Holdings, in Dongguan, southern China. Two factors make conditions ripe. There is a labour shortage, with better jobs available in the service sector. At the same time, a slowing economy is forcing managers to try to claw back certain perks and benefits; at Yue Yuen, it was the underpayment of contributions to a retirement fund that sparked the trouble.
Weixin is a mobile messaging service similar to WhatsApp in the west. It is zonal – so you can search for people you know nearby. But its attraction for the strikers was that theycould create invite-only groups there. “That’s where the core organisers were,” says He. On top of that, the strikers used Weibo – a service similar to Twitter – to disseminate news about the strike.
Though the strike was settled, its significance has not been lost on China’s government. In an industrial landscape that often looks more like the 19th than the 21st century, the internet is rapidly changing workplace dynamics.
It’s hard to imagine, if you’ve not been inside the regimented and stressful atmosphere of a Chinese factory, what an internet cafe first felt like to someone who has only ever slept on a farm or in a factory dorm. “Our foreman is a tough guy. But when I meet him in the internet cafe I am not afraid of him,” one female worker told researchers in 2012. “He has no right to control me here. He is an internet user. So am I.”
But that now feels like prehistory. We’ve got the mobile internet – which has been bigger than the desktop internet in China for two years and involves more than 600 million people. On top of that there is social media. With a combination of Weibo, QQ and Weixin you’ve got the atmosphere of the internet cafe in your pocket.
Now, on top of technology and a changed economic situation, there is the example of Occupy Central. This peaceful mass movement for democracy in Chinese-administered Hong Kong has brought hundreds of thousands to the streets, mobilised different sections of society, and used the same tools – internet, social media and occupied space – as the horizontal movements in Europe and the US. “China is different”, the perennial excuse of Sinologists for the population’s failure to rebel against Communist party rule, looks hollow since Occupy Central began.
It is not clear how much people inside mainland China know about Occupy Central. But at Sun Yat-sen University in Guangdong last year, students organised a mild, mainly cultural response to it – printing T-shirts with the slogan “Not only birds are free” and launching discussions around related issues. The students involved included some who had previously been factory workers – and who were now involved in advocacy work for factory workers in mainland China.
At the very least, we can assume the worlds of Occupy Central and the world of the Guangdong province factory workers are not hermetically separated.
In the 1990s, when the Chinese government was still dealing with the remnants of an old, industrial, relatively privileged working class, concentrated in heavy industries, worker unrest was treated as tantamount to treason. The initial years of rapid expansion brought chaos and brutality. But before long, official Chinese unions began to organise the migrant workforce, and workers were given basic legal rights. This “normalisation” of labour relations is not threatened by the outbreak of strikes this year. But information technology injects a new dynamic.
In the west, the phenomenon of the networked individual began in San Francisco and spread via the middle classes to the tech-savvy youth. Manual workers, and trade unions, were relatively late to the game. In China, you have a factory workforce with harsh, hierarchical conditions and very little free time, accessing their devices in toilet breaks or on the train home. The contrast between hierarchy at work and the relative freedom of the internet is stark.
China is now experiencing 21st-century conflicts over what look like 19th-century issues: poverty, sweated labour, corrupt management. There is one bulletin board, for example, that specialises only in anonymously submitted photographs of Communist bureaucrats wearing luxury watches.
If this was only about factory workers versus corrupt bosses, the implications would be interesting but not dramatic. But if you accept that the main faultline in the world is between networks and hierarchies, then China is sitting right on top of it. And China’s workers – who look like digital rebels, but analogue slaves – are right at the heart of the phenomenon.
The Chinese central government said that it is "confident" that the Hong Kong government can handle the movement lawfully, according to a report in Chinese state media. The Chinese government opposes all illegal activities that "could undermine rule of law and jeopardize 'social tranquility,'" the report says.<U+200B>
The main question burning in the minds of most Hong Kongers is how this will all end – and almost everyone involved can surmise a worst-case scenario. Hong Kong’s former security chief Regina Ip said on Monday that the city government fears a “mini-Tiananmen” – presumably that the protests would be violently dispersed, perhaps by the Chinese military. Nobody wants to see a repeat of 4 June 1989, when Beijing dispatched the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) to open fire on peaceful pro-democracy protesters. The PLA maintains a garrison in Hong Kong, but Leung said in a televised address on Monday morning that the Hong Kong government would not call in the troops. Chinese state media has also emphasised the central government’s confidence in Hong Kong authorities to deal with the protests themselves. That said, the protests continue to escalate, and Beijing seems ready to stand its ground, no matter what the cost.
"If you study the decision by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, you will find it comparable to universal suffrage in many other countries during various periods of time. It's one person, one vote and every vote counts the same. It takes some Western countries 200 years to achieve. But after resuming sovereignty over Hong Kong, it took China only 20 years to achieve this in the Chief Executive election," he said.
China has called the protests "illegal" and Hong Kong's leader C.Y. Leung has said repeatedly that China's Communist Party leaders won't reverse a decision requiring a pro-Beijing committee to screen candidates in the territory's first direct elections in 2017.
"He wanted to present himself as someone from the grassroots, not linked to the tycoons... but people have been terribly disappointed," says Joseph Cheng, a professor of political science at City University of Hong Kong.
The protests will never spill over into the rest of China … For the minority of people who want to foment a ‘colour revolution’ on the mainland by way of Hong Kong, this is but a daydream,” it said.
By Sunday, fears had spread that the police would use force to remove demonstrators at the government’s headquarters. Leung Chun-ying, Hong Kong’s chief executive, pledged on Saturday to “take all necessary actions” to reopen the government building by Monday morning.
That was the case with Rowena Leung, 32, a kindergarten teacher, who said in an interview at an antiviolence protest on Saturday that she remembered watching the television news with her parents on the night in 1989 that the shooting began in Beijing and other mainland cities. She recalled her mother and grandmother crying. “My mother came to my room and told me before I went to sleep, ‘You are so lucky you are in Hong Kong, you are not in mainland China,’ ” she said.
Protest leaders said they had not received any funding from the United States government or nonprofit groups affiliated with it. Chinese officials choose to blame hidden foreign forces, they argued, in part because they find it difficult to accept that so many ordinary people in Hong Kong want democracy.
The protesters, who have being calling for the resignation of Hong Kong’s chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, and elections free of interference from Beijing, have posed an unprecedented challenge to the government. At their peak two weeks ago, organisers said as many as 200,000 people thronged the streets for peaceful sit-ins. The numbers involved have since dwindled.
While FireChat became the app of choice in Hong Kong's -- and saw similar success in protests earlier this year in Taiwan -- Daligault said the app was never designed as a messaging tool for protesters.
Hong Kong leader C.Y. Leung said Thursday that the government was eager to resume talks with the main student group as early as next week. 
On Saturday afternoon, the main protest site in the Admiralty district – now an elaborate sprawl of tents and pro-democracy art installations – was buzzing with demonstrators and curious passerby. Many protesters said that they would not leave until the government offered a significant compromise.
During that weekend, police in Hong Kong arrested about 70 student protesters, including several of its young leaders, in the mass call for democracy. 
“You have violated the principles of ‘one country, two systems,’ challenged the authority of the central party, ignored the Basic Law, and earned fistfuls of cash only to then turn and scold your motherland,” said the commentary, singling out Ms. Ho, Mr. Wong and a Hong Kong actor, Chapman To, who have been among the most visible celebrities at the protest sites. “Is this how you treat the country that gave birth to you and raised you?”
It was Mr. Patten’s recent defense of the protesters’ goals that prompted the People’s Daily attack. The newspaper’s editorial acknowledged his role in promoting democracy in the 1990s but said his aim was to create “a not inconsiderable gulf between the mainland and Hong Kong.”
The protesters see a clear worst-case scenario, just across the border. Mainland Chinese media covered the protests extensively while almost never showing the demonstrators themselves or articulating their demands. Official editorials repeatedly claim that the movement is backed by “hostile foreign forces” intent on fomenting a “colour revolution” to undermine Beijing. State TV stations interview bystanders who, speaking in Mandarin – which is not widely spoken in Hong Kong – blame the protesters for taking secret payouts to hit the streets.
My generation’s political awakening has been simmering for years. Nearly five years ago, young people led protests against the wasteful construction of a new rail line connecting Hong Kong to mainland China. In 2011, many young people, myself included, organized to oppose a national education program of Chinese propaganda that Beijing tried to force on us. I was 14 at the time, and all I could think was that the leaders in Beijing have no right to brainwash us with their warped view of the world.
"The leaders in Beijing are afraid that if they give democracy to Hong Kong, then other parts of China, like Xinjiang and Tibet, will also ask for it," said a 17-year old female high school student who lives in Taipei. 
Patten criticised the government for not summoning the Chinese ambassador to Britain over the situation and said the British government should have spoken up in June when China issued a “white paper” policy document on Hong Kong underscoring China’s sovereignty and ultimate authority over the city.
"We can use different media to express ourselves... to tell people what we feel about Hong Kong," Lau said. "I like the peaceful and silent protest and I'm supporting the students behind the scenes."
“The idea is to make 10 of these, one on each lamppost, lining the street all the way past the P.L.A. building to Central,” he said, referring to the People’s Liberation Army headquarters and Hong Kong’s business district. Mr. Wong, who flew back from Europe when he heard the protests were starting, was getting a helping hand with his installation from a group of working-class men.
Other news articles, social media posts, and images of Hong Kong's protests have been heavily censored in China: as the first images of the occupation went viral, even Instagram became inaccessible.
The young design student nervously picked at her noodles as she recounted being pulled aside last week at the Chinese-Hong Kong border.
It was supposed to be a routine trip for cheap material from China. Instead she spent more than an hour being searched and interrogated by border guards, and was ultimately put on a bus back to Hong Kong. She was told she was a threat to national security. The reason: she had been videotaped at a protest months ago in Hong Kong.
A growing number of people in Hong Kong who have taken part in the city’s recent pro-democracy protests aresuddenly finding themselves denied entry into China. The action hasshocked many and sparked widespread belief that Chinese authorities have assembled a blacklist with hundreds, perhaps thousands, of names in recent months.
In a well-publicised incident recently, three leaders of the ongoing student protest were stopped while trying to fly to Beijing to confront Chinese leaders. Their case– staged in part as a form of protest – drew international headlines, but subsequent cases have been more surprising because they involve relative unknowns– not leaders – whomerely participated in protests among hundreds of thousands of others.
For some, the denials threaten their livelihoods because of how intertwined Hong Kong’s economy is with mainland China’s. They may also cast a chilling pall on freedom of expression and havealready fuelled paranoia among protesters, fearful of future consequences from being on China’s watch lists.
The 23-year-old design student who was stopped last week, for example, asked to speak anonymously for fear of further retaliations by Chinese authorities. Since her hassle at the border, she has avoided saying anything personal or sensitive over the phone in case it is being tapped.Before speaking with a foreign reporter, she checked his press card and compared his face with online pictures searched on a smartphone. “Everything we watch on the news about mainland China – the paranoia, human rights abuses, the way the Communist party treats its citizens – for the first time in my life, I feel that way about Hong Kong,” she said.
When the former British colony was returned to China in 1997, Beijing promised that its residents would continue to enjoy freedoms unseen in the mainland. People in Hong Kong holdlarge annual rallies on the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square crackdown and freely discuss China’s political system on social media like Facebook and Twitter.
Another promise was suffrage, and at the heart of the current movement – called the Umbrella Revolution or Occupy Central – is the demand that Hong Kong residents be allowed to choose Hong Kong’s leaders themselves, instead of having candidates pre-vetted by Beijing.
“This new trend of denying entry is a powerful weapon, not just against students but against professionals who want to support the movement,” said Willy Lam, a political analyst at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. “Everyone these days needs access to China. It doesn’t matter if you’re an accountant, architect or anything else, that’s where the market is.”
According to the Chinese government, Hong Kong residents made 154m trips to the mainland in 2013 alone, up 3.4% from the year before.
Among those who have reported being turned away at the border are a member of the student union at Hong Kong Baptist University, a Lingnan University studentwho was trying to buy books in the Chinese city of Shenzhen and a City University student trying to visit relatives. Eric Tang, 21, a student at Open University of Hong Kong, said he was turned away this month while trying to shop with his girlfriend in Shenzhen.
Over the course of two hours, he said, guards took his Hong Kong ID cards and searched his body and bag. Then they turned on his laptop and rifled through that.
He said he was surprised because he is not a famous figure like the Hong Kong democracy activists and legislators denied entry in the past. He is a Democratic party member, which may have got him tagged, but he suspects his denial was triggered by a 1 July protest he attended – a summer precursor to the current occupying movement that continues to paralyse parts of downtown Hong Kong.
Many recently denied entry attended that same summer protest, which drew one of the biggest pro-democracy crowds in recent years. More than 500 were arrested and released with warnings.
Tang said he had no problems traveling to China throughout October to visit his sick grandfather. But now, his relatives, already nervous about his democracy advocacy, are worried his troubles will affect their freedom to travel to China. Tang said he worries, too, whether his trouble could have an impact on friends and classmates.
For theyoung design student, who was also arrested at the 1 July protest and released on 2 July,not having access to China may mean buying costlier, inferior design materials in Hong Kong and perhaps a lower grade in her classes. She remains deeply rattled from her interrogation by border guards. But if she had to do it all over again, she would have attended the protests just the same, she said. “I have nothing to be ashamed of. I have no regrets about what I did.”
This article appeared in Guardian Weekly, which incorporates material from the Washington Post“At first I just couldn’t believe it. Look at me,” said the 23-year-old who stands barely over 1.5 metres. “How could I threaten anyone’s security?”
