The confrontation with Beijing has moved the territory to the front lines of the battle for democratic rights in China since a government clampdown silenced much dissent on the mainland. Since Hong Kong was returned by Britain to Chinese rule in 1997, it has enjoyed considerable legal autonomy under the “one country, two systems” formula, in which Hong Kong residents retained rights not available elsewhere in China.
In an early morning video statement addressed to all Hong Kong residents, Hong Kong Chief Executive C.Y. Leung called for people to leave. He said police have exercised the greatest possible restraint in dealing with the protesters.
Last month, the Chinese legislature proposed election rule changes for Hong Kong. Starting in 2017, they would allow residents to vote directly for the leader of the city’s government, the chief executive, but a nominating committee dominated by pro-Beijing loyalists would be used to restrict how many and which candidates could enter the contest.
“We have to raise our bargaining power,” Alex Chow Yong Kang, the secretary general of the Hong Kong Federation of Students, said in an interview. “We have to tell them that Hong Kong people are willing to sacrifice much more.”
Frustration with Chinese policy in Hong Kong is especially deep among the young, and contention over voting rights has given many otherwise apolitical students a jolt of civic engagement.
A telephone poll conducted this month by researchers from the Chinese University of Hong Kong and released over the weekend vividly demonstrated the generational divide. While 54 percent of Hong Kong’s Cantonese-speaking residents said the city’s Legislative Council should veto electoral changes if they excluded candidates whose political positions differed from the Chinese government’s, that percentage went up to 76 among people ages 15 to 24.
On Monday, he met a delegation of some of Hong Kong’s wealthiest tycoons, many of whom have argued that street protests like those threatened by Occupy Central would imperil the city’s reputation for business-friendly stability. In published comments afterward, he told the business leaders that the Chinese government’s basic policies on Hong Kong “have not changed and will not change,” Xinhua, the state-run news agency, reported.
Students on the main campus of the University of Hong Kong noted a drop in attendance of local students on Monday. Benny Tai, an associate professor of law at the university, who is a founder of Occupy Central, said his morning class was half-empty.
Jean Wang, a Communist Party member from Zhejiang Province on China’s east coast, attended the protest to make a video for her journalism class. It was interesting to see the Hong Kong students exercising their right to protest, she said.
One of the tenets contained in the Basic Law, and reaffirmed by Lu Ping, China's then-top official on Hong Kong, was the right to develop its own democracy. "How Hong Kong develops its democracy in the future is completely within the sphere of the autonomy of Hong Kong," Lu was quoted as saying in the state media People's Daily in March 1993. "The central government will not interfere."
What Prompted the Hong Kong Protests? Hong Kong belongs to China and operates under a policy of “one country, two systems.” Hong Kong, a British colony until 1997, when China resumed sovereignty, is governed by a mini-constitution, the Basic Law.
"I think the 'Occupy Central' movement is the Hong Kong version of street politics and color revolutions we've seen in other countries. It's very dangerous," said Chen Zuo'er, a former vice minister of the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office under China's cabinet.
Just yards from where thousands of pro-democracy supporters have been "occupying" the heart of Hong Kong's financial district, stands an imposing gray building surrounded on all sides by a high wall -- this is the Hong Kong garrison of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), China's armed forces.
“Of course we love China, but we are worried about damage to Hong Kong economics. That’s why we’re here,” he added.What Prompted the Hong Kong Protests? Hong Kong belongs to China and operates under a policy of “one country, two systems.” Hong Kong, a British colony until 1997, when China resumed sovereignty, is governed by a mini-constitution, the Basic Law.
“Hong Kong has been acting as a reference point for China — whatever they want to do, they come to Hong Kong to take a look first, and if it is good they pick it up,” said Li Kui-Wai, an associate professor of economics and finance at the City University of Hong Kong. “In a sense, they are trying to catch up with us.”
“They control the destiny of the economy in Hong Kong,” Mr. Wang said. “If we just ignore their interests, the Hong Kong capitalism will stop.”Because Hong Kong is a creation of the British Empire, many Hong Kongers have thought of themselves as apart from China for the entirety of the city’s existence. The distinct identity has been reinforced by the enduring dominance of Cantonese and the Cantonese popular culture — film, music, television — that is not only beloved by Hong Kongers but also embraced by the Hong Kong diaspora, keeping their identities rooted more in their home city than in China. Overseas Hong Kongers have returned to join the protests.
“What is happening in Hong Kong is about the people of Hong Kong, and any assertion otherwise is an attempt to distract from the issue at hand, which is the people of Hong Kong expressing their desire for universal suffrage and an election that provides a meaningful choice of candidates representative of the voters’ will,” said Scott Robinson, the spokesman for the United States Consulate in Hong Kong. He added that, “U.S. diplomats regularly meet with a broad cross-section of Hong Kong society both in Hong Kong and in Washington and do not support any particular political party or person.”
Amnesty International also condemned the “vicious” attack. “It is stomach-churning to think there are Hong Kong police officers that feel they are above the law,” Mabel Au, the director of Amnesty Hong Kong, said in a statement.
The revolution will not be televised but it will be tweeted, instant messaged or, in the case of Hong Kong, broadcast on mesh networks like FireChat.
Pro-democracy demonstrators recapture part of bustling district in Hong Kong
On Saturday afternoon, Hong Kong’s chief secretary, Carrie Lam, set a date for a dialogue with the Hong Kong Federation of Students, a surprising conciliatory gesture given the demonstrators’ recalcitrance.
That protest, fueled by youngsters, is now continuing into its fourth week in Hong Kong. 
“Regardless of how official the bans might be, they can always achieve the same result by scaring off people or companies who might otherwise want to approach us,” said Ms. Ho, who was camping out this week beneath an overpass near Hong Kong’s government headquarters amid a sea of colorful tents.
“I was personally very stunned that Beijing could unabashedly tell lies in the face of so many Hong Kong people, because Hong Kong people can vividly remember the democracy struggle between the former British government and the Chinese government,” said Ming Sing, a political scientist at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Simon said that a crackdown, while unlikely, would be devastating for the city. “Can Hong Kong survive with [student leader] Joshua Wong in jail, or [Next Media CEO] Jimmy Lai in jail – do you think Hong Kong could survive that? I say no. It won’t work. The world’s not going to treat you the same.”
In the future I may be arrested again and even sent to jail for my role in this movement. But I am prepared to pay that price if it will make Hong Kong a better and fairer place.
Victor Teo of the University of Hong Kong said Taiwan's leader is making progress as he negotiates the thin line between economic pragmatism and sovereignty. 
Patten, the last British governor of Hong Kong before the 1997 handover, said China’s actions were “spit in the face” of the 1984 Joint Declaration on the conditions under which Hong Kong would be handed over.
Britain should be doing more to help the governments of Hong Kong and China settle the situation, he said, calling on Hong Kong’s leaders to offer more concessions to the protesters to encourage them to back down."We can use different media to express ourselves... to tell people what we feel about Hong Kong," Lau said. "I like the peaceful and silent protest and I'm supporting the students behind the scenes."
Just as the protests have upended the notion that Hong Kong people do not care about politics, the blast of public art is changing the image of a city better known for making money than for art and culture. Still best known as an international financial center, and lacking a world-class art museum, Hong Kong has become the world’s third-largest art market behind New York and London, thanks to high-priced auctions and an array of art galleries that have opened here in the past few years.
The memory of China's 1989 Tiananmen square crackdown on pro-democracy protesters has loomed over Hong Kong and Beijing from the start. More than once, protesters have wondered whether Beijing will activate the 6,000 People's Liberation Army troops believed to be stationed in Hong Kong -- but so far, there's been no sign that will happen.
Another promise was suffrage, and at the heart of the current movement – called the Umbrella Revolution or Occupy Central – is the demand that Hong Kong residents be allowed to choose Hong Kong’s leaders themselves, instead of having candidates pre-vetted by Beijing.
He said he was surprised because he is not a famous figure like the Hong Kong democracy activists and legislators denied entry in the past. He is a Democratic party member, which may have got him tagged, but he suspects his denial was triggered by a 1 July protest he attended – a summer precursor to the current occupying movement that continues to paralyse parts of downtown Hong Kong.
It was supposed to be a routine trip for cheap material from China. Instead she spent more than an hour being searched and interrogated by border guards, and was ultimately put on a bus back to Hong Kong. She was told she was a threat to national security. The reason: she had been videotaped at a protest months ago in Hong Kong.
According to the Chinese government, Hong Kong residents made 154m trips to the mainland in 2013 alone, up 3.4% from the year before.
Over the course of two hours, he said, guards took his Hong Kong ID cards and searched his body and bag. Then they turned on his laptop and rifled through that.
For some, the denials threaten their livelihoods because of how intertwined Hong Kong’s economy is with mainland China’s. They may also cast a chilling pall on freedom of expression and havealready fuelled paranoia among protesters, fearful of future consequences from being on China’s watch lists.
When the former British colony was returned to China in 1997, Beijing promised that its residents would continue to enjoy freedoms unseen in the mainland. People in Hong Kong holdlarge annual rallies on the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square crackdown and freely discuss China’s political system on social media like Facebook and Twitter.
