Officials said six of the ship’s 462 passengers had died, at least 55 are injured and 179 have been rescued. Many passengers - of which 300 are children - may have been trapped inside the vessel as it listed and sank.
The third mate, who was at the helm of the ship when Lee left, said he did not make a sharp turn. Rather, he said, "the steering turned much more than usual." 
Authorities said the dead included a female crew member in her early 20 and two male high school students. A coast guard officer confirmed a fourth fatality but had no immediate details about it.
There were conflicting reports throughout the morning of the number of people who had been rescued. Four hours after the accident, Yonhap said 368 people had been confirmed as safe, including 13 injured, with a further 107 unaccounted for.
But as reports emerged that two people were dead, YTN, a major TV network, withdrew the report and said it had yet to confirm the safety of all of the members of the school party.
The area had been shrouded in fog overnight, leading to the cancellation of many ferry services to islands. But news reports said visibility in the area was fair on Wednesday morning.
Passenger testimony indicated that the ship had struck rocks about 20 km off the coast of Byungpoong island.
Other reports said passengers had been told to put on lifejackets and jump into the sea amid fears that the vessel was on the verge of sinking. News footage showed that at least one lifeboat aboard the ferry had been deployed.
"The ship is taking in water and sinking," a coastguard spokesman told AFP by phone as the rescue operation got under way. "There are around 450 people on board and we have coastguard vessels, commercial ships in the area, as well as helicopters all engaged in the rescue operation," the spokesman added.
The pupils, from Danwon high school in Ansan city near Seoul, were on their way to Jeju, a popular tourist destination, for a four-day study trip. The ship left Incheon port on Tuesday evening, according to
"As the ferry was shaking and tilting, we all tripped and bumped into each another," Lim said from a gymnasium on a nearby island, where he and other survivors were being treated.
Other survivors said they feared the death toll would rise significantly as they believed dozens of people were still trapped inside the ferry after it listed and then sank into the sea about 20km (12 miles) from the coast of Byungpoong island about two hours after issuing a distress signal.
Some people yelled at those who couldn't get out, urging them to break windows, said Kim, who had just eaten breakfast when he felt the ferry tilt and then crash into something.
The ferry operator reportedly asked passengers to stay inside their cabins, Kim said, adding that he had not heard an announcement urging people to leave the ship before it sank.
"There was a bang and then the ship suddenly tilted over," Yonhap quoted a 57-year-old survivor as saying. "Downstairs were restaurants, shops and entertainment rooms, and those who were there are feared to have failed to escape."
Navy divers trying to locate people still trapped inside the ship were frustrated by poor visibility created by mud stirred up from the seabed.
Pupils at the school were sent home early as distraught parents arrived seeking information about their children. Others rushed to ports in the country's south-west after receiving calls from their children confirming they were safe. One pupil said she saw several parents in tears as she left the school. Children who had not joined the trip started crying as news of the accident came through on their mobile phones, reports said.The Sewol took two and a half hours to sink, but many survivors have reported that the crew told passengers it was safer to stay put inside the ship, likely dooming them. (The captain says he later issued instructions for passengers to evacuate the ship, but it remains unclear if that was conveyed to passengers.)
After the conversation switches to the traffic service in Jindo,  the Sewol crew member says several times that the ship is leaning too much for passengers to move.
The authorities in other countries should also review their laws and procedures. Many such pledges were made after the Italian cruise ship Costa Concordia struck a rock and was wrecked in the Mediterranean in 2012, with the loss of 32 lives, yet the fate of the Sewol shows that much remains to be done on planning for emergency evacuations. The Costa Concordia, of course, is notorious also for the flight of the captain, Francesco Schettino, before most of the passengers were rescued. Mr. Schettino is currently on trial, charged with causing a shipwreck, manslaughter and abandoning ship. Captain Lee and six crew members of the Sewol have also been arrested. Under South Korean law, abandoning passengers at a time of crisis is punishable by life in prison.Steeped in regret for what he clearly sees as a needless waste of life, the captain wonders what would have happened if the other ship's crew had followed protocol.
In videos recovered from the cellphones of passengers aboard the ferry Sewol, a voice can be heard over the ship’s intercom urging students and their teachers to stay put, telling them they are safer where they are. But as the ship continued to tip and the voice over the intercom repeated the same instructions, panic spread. Some passengers apparently sensed the approaching doom, and sent farewells to their families.
Among the text messages, photos and video clips that have been produced by passengers of the ill-fated ship, Su-hyeon’s 15-minute footage bears the most dramatic witness to the panic and fear, as well as youthful naïveté and optimism, of the students trapped inside the ship while many of the crew members, including the captain, were among the first to desert their vessel.
“The ship is leaning!” one passenger can be heard saying.
Over the intercom, the students were again urged not to move and to hold onto what they could. The ship’s captain and crew members later told reporters and investigators that they had thought it was safer for the passengers to stay in their cabins than to move in a panicked mass, causing the ship to list faster, or for them to jump into cold waters when the rescue ships were still far away.
At 9:03, one student wondered, “What is the captain doing?”
Mr. Lee, the captain, was in his room and the least experienced of his four mates was in charge of its navigation when the vessel suddenly listed in waters notorious for rapid and unpredictable currents. Mr. Lee and 14 other crew members have been arrested on charges of abandoning their passengers in an emergency.
When he was deserting the ship, the 69-year-old captain was still in his underpants.As students felt the ship shuddering and wondered whether it was sinking, a crew member came onto the intercom, urging students to stay put.
“What? Hurry! Save us!” a student shrieked. Another wondered, “Are we going to die?” A minute later, as the ship listed further, some students suggested donning life jackets. An announcement over the intercom again instructed passengers to stay where they were.
At 8:55, while the ship’s crew sent its first distress signal, one student in the cabin below shouted, “We don’t want to die!”
Three minutes later, students yelled “Silence! Silence!” as the ship’s intercom crackled again, repeating the same message: Stay put and wear life jackets if possible.
“Yes, sir!” a few students responded in a hopeful tone. But another questioned the instruction: “What’s going on? If they are telling us to wear life jackets, doesn’t that mean that the ship is sinking?”
One of Ye-seul’s classmates could be heard pleading: “Save us, save us.” But one of the first things the Coast Guard rescuers did was help the ship’s captain, Lee Jun-seok, and other crew members off the sinking ferry.
After a two-and-a-half-minute break, the video resumed at 9:00, when students began passing one another life jackets and one wanted to have a picture taken as a “souvenir.” Some students complained that the zippers of their life jackets did not work and one student gave his life jacket to a classmate who could not find one.
