Story highlights Boris Johnson appointed new UK Foreign Secretary
Ms. May has effectively handed Mr. Johnson, Mr. Davis and Mr. Fox the responsibility for successfully carrying out the withdrawal — known as Brexit — which they repeatedly promised would yield new opportunities.
Even so, Mr. Johnson’s elevation to such a prestigious post represents a remarkable change of fortunes in a career that has had its share of them. He played a key role in the extraordinary national dramas of the last few months, abandoning Mr. Cameron, who desperately tried to keep Britain in the European Union, and cheerfully becoming the public face of the Brexit campaign.
Yet when Mr. Cameron announced his resignation after the referendum, Mr. Johnson’s hopes of succeeding him as Conservative Party leader were undermined by another Brexit supporter, Justice Secretary Michael Gove, who threw aside his support for Mr. Johnson and announced his own candidacy. Mr. Gove argued that Mr. Johnson was not up to the job.
Ms. May herself recently mocked Mr. Johnson’s negotiating skills over London’s purchase of used German water cannons when he was mayor. She blocked the use of the cannons, citing fears that they could cause serious injuries.
Among other appointments, Ms. May promoted Amber Rudd, former energy secretary, to home secretary. That ensures that one of the biggest political offices — and Ms. May’s old job — remains in the hands of a woman. The new prime minister chose Philip Hammond, who had been foreign secretary, as chancellor of the Exchequer, replacing George Osborne, a close Cameron ally.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
He has a history of insulting foreign leaders and peoples
“It has been the greatest honor of my life to serve our country as prime minister over these last six years, and to serve as the leader of my party for almost 11 years,” Mr. Cameron said. “My only wish is continued success for this great country that I love so very much.”
Mr. Cameron cited the nation’s economic recovery as his top legacy. “With the deficit cut by two-thirds, two and a half million more people in work and one million more businesses, there can be no doubt that our economy is immeasurably stronger,” he said.
“I’m delighted that for the second time in British history, the new prime minister will be a woman, and once again a Conservative,” Mr. Cameron said. “I believe Theresa will provide strong and stable leadership in fulfilling the Conservative manifesto on which we were elected, and I wish her well in negotiating the best possible terms for Britain’s exit from the European Union.”
Hours earlier, in his final parliamentary duty, Mr. Cameron took part for the last time in prime minister’s questions, the weekly ritual in which lawmakers interrogate the leader in often combative exchanges.
(CNN) After just two weeks in the political wilderness, Boris Johnson is back.
Ms. May moved into 10 Downing Street after a day of political ritual that saw Mr. Cameron address lawmakers for the last time as prime minister, before tendering his resignation to Queen Elizabeth II.
Only on Monday did Ms. May learn that she would become prime minister, when the last remaining contender to lead the governing Conservative Party, Andrea Leadsom, quit the race. Ms. May takes over at a time of acute political turmoil and economic uncertainty and is the 13th prime minister to serve this queen — the first was Winston Churchill.
On Wednesday, the discussion was more respectful — and lighthearted — than usual, as Mr. Cameron’s political adversaries and allies paid tribute to him.
The response to the decision by new UK Prime Minister Theresa May to appoint Johnson Foreign Secretary has been largely one of shock, even among the former London Mayor's supporters. Johnson actively campaign for the UK to leave the European Union -- May was a Remainer -- and backed her rival to be Conservative Party leader.
Putting crucial international portfolios firmly in the hands of Brexit supporters was perhaps an astute move for Ms. May, who had argued, tepidly, for Britain to remain in the European Union.
Not only do the appointments appear to reflect a desire to unite her party around the outcome of the June 23 vote, they may also be calculated to head off any suggestion from right-wingers that she might not follow the will of the voters.
Ms. May’s task is more formidable than that of most of her predecessors. She must chart a course that unites her Conservative Party and takes Britain out of the European Union, while limiting the effect of withdrawal on an economy already heading for a downturn and bruised by a slump in the value of its currency.
The Brexit referendum divided the nation, with the majority of voters in a number of less affluent areas opting to quit the bloc, while most of those in London, Scotland and Northern Ireland took the opposite view. On Monday, Ms. May outlined some of the economic changes she hopes to make, speaking about taming excessive executive pay, and arguing that big multinational companies must pay their fair share in taxes.
“I’m told that there are lots of leadership roles out there at the moment: there’s the England football team, there’s ‘Top Gear,’ there’s even across the big pond the role that needs filling,” Danny Kinahan, a lawmaker from Northern Ireland, told Mr. Cameron jokingly, referring to England’s soccer team, a wildly popular BBC television show — and the United States presidential election.There was also the unlikeliness of making Johnson -- who has a history of insulting foreign leaders and overseas gaffes -- Britain's chief diplomat.
He also cited among his accomplishments the legalization of same-sex marriage, in 2013; changes to the education system; and reduced wait times for operations in Britain’s National Health Service.
"Dear world ... sorry," read the headline of the UK's Daily Mirror in the wake of Johnson's appointment, while U.S. State Department spokesman Mark Toner seemed to smile with disbelief when he was given the news at a press conference (before hurriedly restoring his expression to a more diplomatic neutrality).
Others greeted the news with mockery and outrage, with many highlighting Johnson's embarrassing flubs at home and abroad -- like when he got stuck on a zip line or tackled a 10-year-old -- and his numerous insulting comments about foreigners.
Upside: Boris Johnson as UK Foreign Secretary is an absolute godsend for social media satire.
From the archives: UK Foreign Minister Boris Johnson with some truly risible views on Africa. pic.twitter.com/GrWHGZqkhJ — ian bremmer (@ianbremmer) July 13, 2016
Boris Johnson is in charge of MI6.
Boris Johnson is James Bond's boss.
Ladies and gentlemen, our new Foreign Secretary.https://t.co/DLslNUbQst — Paul Beadle (@paulbeadle) July 13, 2016
May's plan with Boris Johnson seems to be "let's put this buffoon in a position of power so he'll discredit himself. What could go wrong?" — Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet) July 13, 2016
"The problem is not that we were once in charge [in Africa] but that we are not in charge any more." Boris Johnson, 2002 — Michael Rosen (@MichaelRosenYes) July 13, 2016
Say hello to Britain's new lead ambassador to the world, Mr. Boris Johnson pic.twitter.com/FUjyjhimyV — Historical Pics (@HistoricalPics) July 13, 2016
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson's first official meeting with President Obama will be interesting. Suggest it starts with the word "sorry" — Chuka Umunna (@ChukaUmunna) July 13, 2016
Boris Johnson as Foreign Secretary. So this is, in fact, the year we all die. — Warren Ellis (@warrenellis) July 13, 2016
Just when Britain was starting to become a laughing stock around the world,
Boris Johnson is appointed foreign secretary. — Ricky Gervais (@rickygervais) July 13, 2016
Boris is currently being shown Theresa's SPECIAL BIG MAP, which gently introduces him to large world-shaped area outside of Westminster — Sue Perkins (@sueperkins) July 13, 2016
How can Boris Johnson be Foreign Secretary when he can't even maintain diplomatic relations with Liverpool? — Rosie Fletcher (@rosieatlarge) July 13, 2016
Good to see @BorisJohnson as the new UK foreign secretary. He's a good friend of Australia. pic.twitter.com/mMztmvDoOP — Tony Abbott (@TonyAbbottMHR) July 14, 2016
