Standing outside Donetsk's coal mine, Igor Yefremov mused over the future of Ukraine's heavy industry. "If we join the European Union our mines and factories will shut down," he said. "Already the orders from Russia are drying up. Russia doesn't want us because of the chaos in Kiev."
In an interview Tuesday with PBS, acting Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said Ukraine is struggling to maintain a fighting capability after it was "deliberately dismantled" under Yanukovych. He said his government ceded Crimea without a shot to demonstrate to the world that Russia was the aggressor, he said. But if Moscow moves against another portion of Ukraine, "We will fight."
At the pithead, Yefromov was gloomy about the mine's prospects. Instead of the EU, Ukraine would be better off joining Vladimir Putin's rival Eurasian Union, he suggested. "It's our only chance," he said.
Lydia Popova, a mine employee for more than four decades, and the editor of its internal newspaper, disagreed. "Joining Russia's customs union is like going back to the USSR. Ukraine wants to be independent from Putin," she said in Russian. "I'm a Ukrainian. The people who work hardest underground here are the Ukrainians."
With bankruptcy looming and its currency enfeebled, Ukraine has received offers of help from the International Monetary Fund, the US and the EU. The new interim government says the country is on the brink of default, and accuses Yanukovych and his entourage of stealing $70bn.
Economists say that Kiev's move towards the EU will have positive and negative consequences. The EU last week abolished import tariffs for Ukrainian goods, previously at 14%. This will help Ukraine's agricultural sector, they suggest – principally businesses that export milk, cheese and sunflower oil. The EU says the deal will help trade between Moscow and Kiev.
The director of Donetsk's steel plant said he worried what would happen if Russia shut its border to Ukrainian goods. "This would be deeply unwelcome," Alexander Seliverstov, told Ukraine's news agency UNIAN. "Traditionally 20-25% of our production goes to Russia. Finding an alternative market at a time of continuing economic crisis would be difficult." (Donetsk Steel is undergoing modernisation and at the moment only produces pig iron.)
Since last month pro-Russian protesters have regularly gathered in the city's Lenin Square. Their key demand is federalisation – greater autonomy for the east. Another is that the new government abandons its plan for European integration. "The EU doesn't want Ukraine. And we don't want the EU. We regard the signing of the association agreement as capitulation," an IT programmer, Roman Protsenko, said. Only friendly relations with "brotherly" Russia could bring prosperity, he argued, saying that Russia, Belarus and Ukraine shared history and orthodox religion.
Others said that two decades after Ukraine became independent, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, living standards had scarcely improved, with many surviving on pathetically low wages. Sergey – a 51-year-old anti-Maidan protester – said he was unemployed and that he and his wife, Irina, survived on her salary of $200 a month. "We've put up with these conditions for 23 years," he said, adding: "Russia is like a magnet. It draws weaker states towards it."
One miner says orders from Russia are drying up. He thinks Russia does not want to deal with them because of the chaos in Kiev. Photograph: Yves Herman/Reuters
A professor of international relations, Igor Todorov, said the anti-EU mood among those struggling to get by was understandable: "The main factor here is emotion. But it's certainly true a part of Ukraine's economy is closely connected with Russia." The Kremlin, he added, had numerous economic levers it could pull to sabotage the economy and undermine Kiev. Moscow, for example, could ban Ukrainian goods, arguing that they don't meet Russian standards, Todorov said.
He said Ukraine's oligarchs were primarily concerned with hanging on to their assets in uncertain times. The country's richest man, billionaire Rinat Akhmetov, is from Donetsk, but is currently keeping a low profile.
Down the road from Donetsk is the port of Mariupol, home to two of Ukraine's biggest steel factories. Mariupol, on the sea of Azov, has previously shipped its exports to Bulgaria, Italy and Turkey. Russia, however, now controls Crimea's Kerch Strait, a narrow sea lane connecting the Azov and Black seas. It has also captured practically all of Ukraine's navy. Would Mariupol still be able to function as a port? "The honest answer is that nobody knows," said a lecturer at Mariupol's technical university, Vladislav Mazur.
Mazur said the problems with Ukraine's economy were profound. They pre-dated this latest crisis, he said, and were possibly insoluble. Some factories had moved with the times. They had improved their ecological standards. Most, however, still relied on Soviet-era equipment and production processes. "Not much has been modernised. Nobody cares about the quality of products," he said. Foreign investment might be able to transform crumbling industries, but this would take time, he suggested.
But voices just as adamant urged caution, and few lawmakers said they were eager for a military confrontation. Mr. Corker said more punitive actions should be threatened only if Russia moved farther into Ukraine or threatened neighbors like Moldova. Senator Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, another member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said military assistance to a Ukrainian force of about 6,000 trained troops against the Russian military would be fruitless.
“They were whining, saying: ‘We cannot visit our houses in Italy. Where we will spend our vacations? You bastard, you didn’t vote. You will be allowed into Europe, we will not’ — stuff like that,” he said.
Shirreff said the question of whether the army being more dependent on reservists would work or not has been left unanswered, but he said it was "one hell of a risk".
Last week, Farage said the European Union had "blood on its hands" for encouraging rebellion in Ukraine, Syria and Libya. While stressing he did not approve of Putin's annexation of Crimea, he said EU leaders had been "weak and vain", adding: "If you poke the Russian bear with a stick he will respond."
In what American officials interpreted as an encouraging sign on Monday that Russia would not invade other regions of Ukraine, the German government released a statement saying Mr. Putin told Chancellor Angela Merkel in a telephone call that he had ordered a partial withdrawal of Russian troops massed on Ukraine’s eastern border, a source of great tension with Western governments in recent weeks.
For his part, Putin warned that sanctions against Russia over Ukraine would “in no way” resolve the crisis. Both leaders agreed the time was right for a new round of peace talks on Ukraine.
