The phenomenon detected was the collision of two black holes. Using the world’s most sophisticated detector, the scientists listened for 20 thousandths of a second as the two giant black holes, one 35 times the mass of the sun, the other slightly smaller, circled around each other.
Dr. Weiss tried to mount a similar effort at M.I.T., also using the laser approach, but at the time, black holes were not in fashion there. (Things are better now, he said.)
And they did so within weeks of turning on their new, upgraded instrument: it took just 20 milliseconds to catch the merger of two black holes, at a distance of 1.3 billion light years, somewhere beyond the Large Magellanic Cloud in the southern hemisphere sky, but it then took months of meticulous checking of the signal against all the complex computer simulations of black hole collision to make sure the evidence matched the theoretical template.
The signal conformed precisely to the predictions of general relativity for black holes as calculated in computer simulations, Dr. Reitze said.
“The colliding black holes that produced these gravitational waves created a violent storm in the fabric of space and time, a storm in which time speeded up and slowed down, and speeded up again, a storm in which the shape of space was bent in this way and that way,” he said.
The Ligo discovery signals a new era in astronomy, he said.
The gravitational waves -- ripples in space-time -- were created by the merging of two black holes, Reitze said. One black hole had the mass of 29 suns; the other was the equivalent of 36 suns. Each was perhaps 50 kilometers (30 miles) in diameter.
The 'chirp' of black holes colliding
The gravitational waves stretched and compressed space around Earth "like Jell-O," said Reitze.
Black holes are a holy grail of the gravitational wave concept. To date, we'd been able only to see their aftereffects. Black holes themselves were a conjecture.
"There's been a lot of indirect evidence for their existence," says Shoemaker, an expert in black holes. "But this is the first time we actually detect two black holes merging and we know the only thing that predicts that (is) gravitational radiation, (which) comes from a binary black hole merging. There's no other way we could have seen that but gravitationally."
This has not yet happened, Murphy said.
“I think it is an important step forward,” said Professor Jo Dunkley of the University of Oxford, who was not involved in the study. “It’s something that people have been trying to work towards for a while.”
“Surprisingly, you can calculate - to really good accuracy - what the large-scale structure of the universe should look like by just using simple Newtonian gravity. Hence virtually all the large computer simulations we use to date just work with Newton’s laws,” says Dr Tessa Baker, also from the University of Oxford. However the new tool, she says, goes further. “It allows one to calculate the small deviations from Newtonian gravity that weren’t captured by any simulation to date.”
