The number of homes changing hands is expected to slump this summer in the wake of the UK’s vote to leave the EU, with estate agents and surveyors more pessimistic about the housing market than at any point since the late 1990s.
Inquiries from buyers fell for the third month running in June, and the number of sales agreed dropped sharply as the Brexit vote fuelled uncertainty in the market, according to the latest monthly survey by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (Rics).
New buyer inquiries declined “significantly” during the month, it said, with 36% more respondents reporting a drop than an increase – the lowest reading since the financial downturn was beginning in mid-2008.
Over the same period, the supply of properties coming onto the market fell in every region except Northern Ireland, Rics said, and sales fell for a third consecutive month.
Looking ahead over the next three months, 26% more Rics members expected sales to drop further than expected a busier housing market. “This is the most negative reading for near-term expectations since 1998,” Rics said.
The numbers of surveyors in London reporting falling prices slipped deeper into negative territory in June, with nearly half of surveyors in the capital reporting falls rather than rises. Price falls were particularly concentrated in central London.
The referendum is not the only factor behind the dip in activity. The stamp duty hike on second homes, which came into force on 1 April, has also disrupted the market.
Rics’s chief economist, Simon Rubinsohn, said: “Big events such as elections typically do unsettle markets so it is no surprise that the EU referendum has been associated with a downturn in activity.
“However even without the buildup to the vote and subsequent decision in favour of Brexit, it is likely that the housing numbers would have slowed during the second quarter of the year, following the rush in many parts of the country from buy-to-let investors to secure purchases ahead of the tax changes.”
Rubinsohn said a critical factor in how the housing market performs in the coming months would be the reaction of the wider economy to the Brexit vote.
“Respondents to the survey are understandably cautious but with interest rates heading lower and sterling significantly so, it remains to be seen whether the concerns about a possible stalling in both corporate investment and recruitment are justified,” he said.
On Wednesday, Britain’s biggest housebuilder said it might reduce the rate at which it builds new homes in response to a possible slowdown in the housing market following the referendum result. Barratt Developments said it was rethinking its building and land-buying programmes because the outlook for the industry was uncertain.
David Thomas, Barratt’s chief executive, said: “Following the EU referendum, we are mindful of the greater uncertainty now facing the UK economy. Consequently, the immediate outlook for our industry is less clear and it is too early to draw any conclusions regarding market conditions from the short trading period since the referendum.
“We had contingency plans in place and we have taken appropriate measures to reduce our risk, such as reassessing land approvals, as we continue to monitor the market.”
However, Thomas said Barratt and the housing industry in general were in good shape. “The sector continues to receive focused government support, mortgage availability is good and there remains an undersupply of new homes,” he said.
Figures from the Council of Mortgage Lenders (CML) show that lending recovered in May after falling sharply in the first month of the new stamp duty rules. The CML said the value of lending for house purchases was up by 8% year on year in May, at £9.4bn, while the number of loans grew by 5% to 53,800. First-time buyers were particularly active, taking out 27,500 loans, 16% higher than in May 2015; for the second month running, new entrants to the market borrowed more than home movers.
However the CML said the Brexit vote could mean there would be quieter months ahead. The CML’s director general, Paul Smee, said: “Brexit, and its likely effect on the market, is a question to which the answer will not immediately be forthcoming. Lenders will continue to be open for business as usual, but lending volumes may be affected by uncertain consumer sentiment.”