Britain will have a new prime minister on Wednesday, but the country’s post-EU future remains uncertain. Indeed, prolonged delays are likely in implementing the voters’ decision to leave.
The first uncertainty is the date on which exit negotiations will start. The process should be completed within two years of invoking article 50 of the treaty of Lisbon, but the incoming prime minister, Theresa May, has already said she would not want to trigger negotiations until the end of the year.
The second uncertainty is whether the negotiations can simultaneously resolve the UK’s terms of exit from the EU and its future trading arrangements with Europe’s single market. While the UK will claim that, under article 50, negotiators should be “taking into account the framework of future relationships”, the EU trade negotiator is insisting that future arrangements can be discussed only after Britain leaves.
The third uncertainty is Britain’s negotiating objectives. Will it seek full access to the single market – the Norway option – or to be part of it (the Swiss option)? Will it go for the Canadian low tariff option, or just trade with Europe on the same terms that all World Trade Organisation members do?
The fourth uncertainty arises from voters’ concerns over immigration and the extent to which any new EU trading arrangement must be conditional on restricting the free movement of workers. May has said she would not accept engagement in the single market without a deal on managing immigration.
In theory, the Norway option, which involves membership of the European Economic Area, could be stretched to include a Liechtenstein-type protocol on limiting residency permits, or involve the use of the EEA’s safeguard clause, which might allow restrictions on migration if inflows rose too quickly. However, fearful that others would demand a similar dispensation, the EU would find it difficult to agree to such a change.
The fifth uncertainty is the EU’s negotiating stance, starting with who will lead the talks, the European commission or the council of ministers. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, has made it clear that she will not give the commission carte blanche to negotiate on Germany’s behalf. Beyond this question lies another: whether Europe will agree on its final negotiating stance before the French presidential election next spring and Germany’s general election in autumn 2017.
The sixth uncertainty is the economic circumstances under which the negotiations will take place. Britain appears to be sliding toward recession as companies put their investment plans on hold. Business pressure on the UK government to move more quickly will thus grow, as a longer wait means a further ebbing of confidence and, in turn, a weakening of Britain’s bargaining position.
The seventh uncertainty is whether the UK itself can survive. Lord North is remembered for losing the British union with America. Two centuries on, the outgoing prime minister, David Cameron, might be remembered for losing two unions – with Europe, and between England and Scotland. While Conservatives want Scotland to be in a Britain without Europe, Scottish nationalists want Scotland in a Europe without Britain. As Northern Ireland’s republicans, led by Sinn Féin, demand a vote to reunite with the Irish Republic, the very existence of the UK is squarely on the agenda.
There is one way to lessen uncertainty and risk: the government should quickly announce that it will be negotiating with the EU on the basis of the Norway option of EEA membership. And ministers should make it clear that EU nationals resident in the UK are welcome to stay.
This avenue would give Britain what businesses want: access to the single market. While the UK would still have to contribute to the EU budget, it could repatriate responsibility for agriculture and fisheries policies, and negotiate its own trade deals, such as with China and India. Joining the EEA would offer an additional advantage – giving Scotland the level playing field it wants in trading with the 27 EU members.
It is also essential to resolve the vexed issue of migration. Any genuine solution must include a fund to help communities whose health facilities, schools and other public services are under stress because of above-average population growth. Tougher enforcement of the minimum wage and other legislation protecting workers is also needed, to allay fears that immigrants are forcing a race to the bottom. EEA negotiations should begin on the basis that our membership would include a protocol on migration and the ability to use the safeguard clause if pressures grow.
An eighth and even greater uncertainty, however, concerns Britain’s future global role. In particular, how will it respond to the irreversible shift in the global economy’s centre of gravity towards Asia, and to the technological innovations that are revolutionising industries and occupations – and thus increasing voters’ anxieties about their employment prospects and future livelihoods?
The referendum result revealed high concentrations of pro-Brexit sentiment in towns that were once at the centre of the industrial revolution, but are now awash with derelict factories and workshops, owing to Asian competition. These areas rebelled against the advice of political and business elites to vote remain, and instead demanded protection from the vicissitudes of global change. The leave campaign’s slogans – centred on bringing back control – aligned it with the populist, protectionist movements that are fracturing old political loyalties throughout the western world.
The result has exposed a Labour party divided between a leadership that elevates anti-globalisation protest above winning power, and a parliamentary group that knows it has to explain how globalisation can be managed in the public interest.
But the governing Conservatives are also split on how to respond to globalisation. Some believe in a global free-for-all; others feel that Britain should be free of foreign entanglements; and a third cohort wants, like Labour, to be part of the EU, viewing it not as the problem, but as part of the solution to managing globalisation. However, because of these divisions, none of the leadership contenders have put forward proposals that address in any meaningful way the grievances of those who feel left behind.
Post-referendum Britain needs a more comprehensive debate on how it will cope with the challenges of global change, and how it will work with the international community to do so. A viable programme for managing globalisation would recognise that every country must balance the autonomy it desires with the cooperation it needs. This would include coordinated monetary and fiscal policies across the G20 countries, renewed efforts to expand world trade, new national agendas addressing inequality and promoting social mobility, and a laser-like focus on science, technology and innovation as the key to future growth.
As long as globalisation appears leaderless, anti-globalisation protesters will stifle reform, shout down proposed trade deals, such the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and make national economies less open. Now facing life outside the EU, Britain cannot ignore or sidestep these global issues. The UK must now decide whether it will stand up to the protectionist impulse that drove the Brexit vote and what part it can play in making globalisation work for all.
Gordon Brown, the former UK prime minister and chancellor, is the UN special envoy for global education and chair of the international commission on financing global education opportunity

© Project Syndicate