Not everyone who voted Leave is a racist, but it feels as if all the racists voted Leave. “We’re British, we don’t want all the other people — we just want us,” a middle-aged woman told a reporter for Sky News.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, the Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
“It’s not about trade or Europe or anything like that,” a man in Yorkshire, in the north of England, told another news program. “It’s about immigration. It’s to stop the Muslims from coming into this country. Simple as that.”
Statements like these suggest that the referendum has emboldened those who yearn for an England before mass migration. When Daniel Hannan, a pro-Leave member of the European Parliament from the Conservative Party, was discussing the fallout from the vote on BBC radio recently, he used the words “phased repatriation.” He was referring to the return of rights from Europe to Britain, but anyone who grew up here in the 1970s and ’80s as the child of immigrants knows the word “repatriation” is freighted with ugly implications. It conjured up a frightening time when the far right was on the rise and immigrants and their children feared we would be encouraged or forced to return to countries that felt foreign but that others insisted were our true homes.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Britain is in a culture war in which those who are younger, better educated, more traveled and living in cities see the world very differently from the rest of the nation. It doesn’t surprise me that nearly 175,000 people have so far signed a petition demanding that London declare independence from Britain and apply to join the European Union. This futile gesture symbolizes how the city feels isolated from so much of the rest of the country. I may feel home in London, but the rest of Britain increasingly seems like a foreign country.
This sense of foreignness isn’t just about race, religion or nationality. Like many Londoners, I moved here from somewhere else. I grew up in Luton, a gritty postindustrial town just an hour drive from Hackney. Luton has a sizable Muslim population, and in recent years Eastern Europeans have settled in the town, too. On Thursday, 56 percent of voters in Luton chose to leave the European Union. My hometown also feels part of this foreign country.
London has a population of about 8.5 million and more than a third of that is now foreign-born. The city encompasses more than 270 nationalities and 300 languages. I live here because it encourages and welcomes hyphenated identities. I can be Pakistani, Muslim, British and European at the same time; my wife can be Scottish and British. The vote seems to have been a vote against multilayered identities. That alarms me. My family and I — my white wife, who was born in Scotland to English parents, my mixed-faith, mixed-race daughter — can feel at home only in places that allow a more complex identity.
Last Thursday I stayed up all night to watch the election results. When my wife woke up, I told her that Britain had voted to leave the European Union but that London and Hackney had voted overwhelmingly to stay in. She started crying. “This feels like a nightmare,” she said. “We can’t ever leave London.” The streets of London still feel familiar and safe, like home. But I worry about what lies beyond.