Computer maker Lenovo is considering price increases in response to falling value of pound while cocoa cost is on the rise
Prices of computers and chocolate are likely to rise in early signs of inflation spurred by the falling value of the pound since Britain voted to leave the EU.
Lenovo, the world’s biggest maker of personal computers, has said it is considering price increases in reaction to sterling’s fall.
The Chinese company’s chief financial officer, Wai Ming Wong, said on Wednesday: “To the extent that we need to pass things on to the customer, we will.” He said Lenovo would also look for other ways to deal with the cost of the falling pound.
Lenovo, which bought IBM’s personal computer business in 2005, will be joined by Dell. The US computer maker said it had held off on price increases for UK business customers before the referendum but that they were now on the way, although consumer products would not be affected immediately.
Lagarde urges speedy Brexit deal as City sees pound hitting new lows – business live Read more
Most computer components are sold in dollars and the pound’s plunge against the US currency has made them more expensive to buy. Other computer makers are likely to increase UK prices following the pound’s fall to 31-year lows this week – a drop of more than 10% since the referendum.
“The recent strengthening of the US dollar versus sterling and other currencies … following the UK’s decision to leave the European Union, will have a direct impact on the price we sell to our UK [business] customers and partners.
“The exact price change will vary across our portfolio, and consumer products are currently not affected,” Dell said in a statement. Dell has ordered a 10% increase in prices, according to the Register website.
The price of cocoa traded in London rose to its highest in almost 40 years on Wednesday in reaction to the pound’s fall. Analysts said the 1.5% jump to £2,495 a tonne, which has eased slightly since, was purely driven by currency movements.

Cocoa’s price rise could be bad news for the UK’s millions of consumers of chocolate products. Britons devour an average of 7.4kg (16.3lb) of chocolate each a year, behind only Switzerland and Germany globally, according to Euromonitor.
Smartphone maker OnePlus said it would raise the price of its OnePlus 3 model from £309 to £329 from 11 July, also attributing the hike to the post-Brexit vote fall in the pound.
The remain campaign predicted higher prices if Britain voted to leave the EU due to the higher cost of imports from the pound’s likely fall. Economists are predicting further falls in sterling’s value as the economy slows and some have raised the prospect of the pound slumping to parity with the US dollar.