Donald Trump has hailed Britain’s decision to leave the EU as a “great victory”, attributing the result to immigration and drawing parallels with opposition to what he described as the “global elite” in the US and elsewhere around the world.
The presumptive Republican nominee for president said he had not only backed Brexit but successfully predicted the result, unlike Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton and even David Cameron.
Anger in response to high immigration was a worldwide phenomenon, he said, insisting this would not be the last upset as he claimed links between a Brexit vote and his candidacy for the White House.
Speaking on the first day of his two day-visit to Scotland, Trump said: “I think really people see a big parallel. A lot of people are talking about that. Not only the United States but other countries. People want to take their country back. They want to have independence in a sense.
“You see it all over Europe and many other cases where they want to take their borders back. They want to take their monetary [sic] back. They want to take a lot of things back. They want to have a country again. I think you are going to have this more and more. I really believe that. And it is happening in the United States.”
Trump, on his first trip overseas since he embarked on his White House bid, faced criticism in the US for making what was essentially a business trip at a time when his campaign has been faltering, falling behind Clinton in the polls and in fundraising.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Donald Trump arrives to the sound of bagpipes. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian
But his timing proved impeccable, arriving just hours after the UK confronted its biggest political crisis for decades, guaranteeing him extensive television coverage in the US.
He turned the vote into political capital, issuing a statement later in the day saying the UK had exercised the “sacred right” of free people to independence and reassert control over their own politics, borders and economy. He promised a Trump administration would deepen its bonds with the UK.

In November, he added, it would be the turn of the US, a chance to redeclare their independence. “They will have the chance to reject today’s rule by the global elite and embrace real change that delivers a government of, by and for the people,” Trump said.

He flew overnight from New York to Glasgow Prestwick airport where he transferred to one of the three Trump helicopters – two permanently based in the US and one in the UK – for the short trip to the Trump Turnberry golf resort, stepping on to the lawn to the sound of bagpipes.
He held the press conference on a promontory overlooking the sea and a lighthouse, the resort’s ninth hole. The start was delayed by a comedian, Lee Nelson, who appeared to be one of the staff, trying to hand out “Nazi” golf balls with swastikas on them.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest The comedian Lee Nelson with the ‘Nazi’ golf balls at the opening of Donald Trump’s Ayrshire hotel and golf course, Trump Turnberry. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian
Trump, in a hat emblazoned with “Make America Great Again” and accompanied by his wife and family, devoted about 15 minutes to extolling the excellence of his golf course, saying that even people who hated him would acknowledge this.
It is unusual for a US presidential candidate to use an overseas trip to make a naked pitch for business but Trump does not see it like that. It was the ninth such visit to one of his hotels or resorts since the campaign began. In an odd twist, he said countries could learn lessons from running golf clubs.
US reporters accompanying Trump said his press conference, in which he repeatedly turned to the issue of immigration, was more restrained than his previous campaign performances.
Asked about Cameron, he expressed sympathy for him, even though there had been what he described as rough patches, presumably a reference to the former prime minister’s criticism of the presumptive Republican candidate. Asked about Boris Johnson, he declined to comment.
Trump said his relationship with the UK was a “love-fest”. I asked Trump why Cameron was not prepared to meet him. He replied: “David Cameron would have met me. David Cameron was negotiating to meet me. But I do not think he wants to meet anyone right now.”
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Trump claimed his relationship with the UK was a ‘love-fest’. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian
I said no senior UK or Scottish politician wanted to meet him, citing Nicola Sturgeon and Alex Salmond, and suggested it was because he was toxic. Taking offence at the question, he described me as “a nasty, nasty guy”.
The only politicians present for the reopening were from South Ayrshire council, led by the provost, Helen Moonie.
The protests were held well away from the press conference, at a car park on the grounds. Trump said the predictions had been that thousands would turn up – in fact the predictions had been a couple of hundred – but and his staff estimated the turnout at only 43.