Already, even as the government has arrested thousands of soldiers and officers who allegedly took part in the failed coup, there were signs that it was using the moment to widen a crackdown on perceived enemies. Alongside the military, the government also dismissed thousands of judges, who seemingly had no role to play in a military revolt.
Military moves in
Arrests and detainments were still happening all over the country on the weekend. People have been gathering together every evening regardless of their political view.
It is clear that a very significant portion of the demonstrators, who responded to President Erdoğan’s call for them to occupy the streets, have no interest in the protection of democracy or civil rights. Arrests don’t seem to be limited to the military personnel under suspicion. Judges and treasury officials are also being removed from office.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Friday, 11:25 p.m.: A faction of the military issues a declaration, saying the "political administration that has lost all legitimacy has been forced to withdraw."
“This will also finish Russia in the end,” Mr. Pereverziev said, “as an empire, as a kleptocratic state.” From Ukraine, “they stole our identity, our language, our land,” he added. “They called us ‘mali brati,’ ” — little brothers — “but we’re not brothers at all, that’s just propaganda.”
His concerns about the future are widely shared here.
Nigar Goksel, a senior Turkey analyst for the International Crisis Group, said there were two possible directions. “Either Erdogan utilizes this incident to redesign institutions in Ankara to his own benefit,” she said, “or he takes the opportunity with the solidarity that was extended to him by the opposition and different segments of society to reciprocate by investing more genuinely in rule of law and legitimate forms of dissent.”
As Turks waited to see in which direction their mercurial and powerful leader would steer the country in the wake of the coup attempt, Mr. Erdogan struck some conciliatory notes on Sunday. Yet he has also raised the possibility that Turkey would reinstate the death penalty, which it had abolished as a part of its pursuit to join the European Union.
