What could a new immigration system look like?
High-profile pro-Brexit campaigners propose an "Australian-style points based immigration system" if the country chooses to leave the European Union.
“When we first heard about the coup attempt, we felt an unprecedented fear,” remembers Hussein Qassoum, a 30-year-old logistics manager living in Istanbul. “Most of my friends started asking: ‘Which other country should we go to now?’”
My friends started texting me that it might be a coup so we told everyone we neeeded to leave the house. You shouldn’t be in an army house during a coup. We were terrified when my mum called me to leave immediately. There were no taxis or ubers. We hitchhiked to a more crowded non-army place and waited 30 mins for a taxi.
So when the sun rose on Saturday to reveal that Erdoğan remained in charge of the country, many Syrians would have been hugely reassured. Some even joined pro-Erdoğan protests, while a group still stuck inside Syria reportedly gathered at a Turkish border crossing to express their satisfaction.
By Saturday morning almost 7,500 military personnel had been detained on accusations of being involved in the coup attempt. According to the state news agency, Anadolu, 133 of those detained were generals and admirals, of whom 126 have been formally arrested. On Sunday, it was announced that the presidential guard would be disbanded, after 300 of the 2,500 officers from the elite unit were rounded up over suspected links to the coup.
Turkey was also already struggling to deal with a rise in attacks by Islamic State, whose most recent assault saw dozens killed at the country’s biggest airport. The detention of so many security officials, and an increasing lack of trust between the different institutions within the security apparatus, can once again only make it harder to tackle the Isis threat.
Cook of the Council on Foreign Relations indicated that Ankara could be signaling that -- after a year of negotiations between the US and the government -- "what the Turks gave, they can take away."
Already the Turks announced their minister of defense and foreign minister would not be attending an upcoming meeting in Washington on ISIS operations long in the works.
In recent years the Dutch Turkish community has become increasingly polarised between supporters and opponents of Erdoğan. About 400,000 Turkish citizens live in the Netherlands, along with 100,000 ethnic Turks from other countries, making up about 2.5% of the population. Rotterdam’s mayor, Ahmed Aboutaleb, appealed for calm within the community at the weekend and said he was prepared to mediate between the two sides if necessary. “Don’t import the conflict: it’s bad enough that these tensions exist,” he said.
