Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
The alliance is coming home after long years in Afghanistan and its limited but vital role in Libya, Mr. Niblett said, amid divisions within the alliance about its role. “But Putin has raised, even more than Slobodan Milosevic in Kosovo, concerns about events that we thought could no longer happen on the European continent,” he said.
The judge in charge of the case indicted Major Trapero on Monday. But the judge rejected the prosecution’s demand that the chief be held in jail without bail pending a trial. Significantly, however, the judge ordered the two leaders of the largest pro-independence citizens’ movements to be detained without bail while the authorities determine whether to charge them with sedition.
The European Union came about as a project to safeguard and guarantee our rights and freedoms. Defending the fundamental rights of Catalan citizens against a wave of repression from the Spanish state is also the same as defending the rights of Spanish and European citizens.
Sunday, March 16, was a day many Ukrainians waited for with concern and dread. Originally, the referendum was planned for May 25, then moved up to March 30 and then once again moved to March 16. 
Spain crisis: 'stop this radicalism and disobedience,' PM tells Catalan leaders Read more
There are historic reasons why many Catalans want to go their own way, reasons rooted in the old kingdoms of Spain, reasons from the years of Franco when their language was banned, as well as supposed financial grievances and a wish for ever greater autonomy. There is also a strand of emotion that, like Brexit, sees salvation in “taking control”.
Opposition lawmakers boycotted the independence vote in the Catalan Parliament. And in the past month, tens of thousands of people have protested in rallies, both in favor and against independence.
The announcement of results signaled to the people of Ukraine that a quiet waiting period of our conflict with Russia is probably over. Even though the United Nations, European Union, United States and other international observers do not recognize results of referendum, Russia is still claiming that Crimea will join with them. 
In the letter, Puigdemont said his government was proposing a two-month window for talks before pressing ahead with independence, but he called on the Spanish authorities to put an end to what he called “the repression of the Catalan people and government”.
