A survey released on September 21 said that one in five people were considering emigrating.
“I can’t predict what will be the outcome and how long we can continue with this action. Actually, this decision should be for the citizens, not Scholarism, Occupy Central with Love and Peace or others,” he said on Wednesday.
Last month, the Chinese legislature proposed election rule changes for Hong Kong. Starting in 2017, they would allow residents to vote directly for the leader of the city’s government, the chief executive, but a nominating committee dominated by pro-Beijing loyalists would be used to restrict how many and which candidates could enter the contest.
“By experience I see many activists putting an inherent trust in their phones while growing a distrust in their computers, and that leads sometimes to irresponsible use of both those technologies.”
While the city enjoys many more legal freedoms than China -- including, crucially, the right to assembly -- this can be a brickbat for pro-Beijing voices. 
But onlookers are still concerned about the range of malware targeting activists over different platforms. Security firm Kaspersky Lab confirmed it had also seen various examples of malicious apps for iOS and Android, as well as spyware samples for other platforms, related to the Hong Kong protests.
China's massively popular microblogging site, Sina Weibo is being censored at the highest rate this year with "Hong Kong" as the most commonly deleted term, according to Weiboscope, a Hong Kong University effort that monitors deleted posts. About 152 out of 10,000 Weibo posts were blocked, said Fu, who also works on Weiboscope.
Protest leaders have repeatedly called for him to go and refuse to negotiate with him, preferring a meeting with his number two -- Carrie Lam. 
When a British landing party planted their flag at Possession Point on Hong Kong island over 170 years ago, they set in motion one of the most complex political relationships to endure to the present day. 
OK, I’ve Googled “689”. This isn’t about the bus route from West Croydon to Monks Orchard, is it? Look, I’ll put you out of your misery. I’m referring to CY Leung.
