Of the 462 people aboard, 325 were students from Danwon High School in Ansan, about 20 miles south of Seoul. By midnight, about 75 of the students had been rescued. They had been on an overnight voyage to Jeju, a popular resort island, where they were scheduled for a four-day field trip and sightseeing.
In a text message shown on the station’s broadcast, a student had written, “Dad, I can’t walk out because the ship is tilted too much, and I don’t see anyone in the corridor.” It was unclear if the student survived.
The World Health Organization says the victims' symptoms are consistent with exposure to nerve agents, pointing to "the apparent lack of external injuries" and "acute respiratory distress as the main cause of death."
Lee Gyeong-og, vice minister of security and public administration, said that 160 navy and coast guard divers were working at the scene, but that their operations were being hampered by rapid currents and poor underwater visibility.
Speaking at the headquarters of the Ministry of Security and Public Administration, she said, “We must do our best to rescue even one of those passengers and students who may not have escaped from the ship.”
On Wednesday, President Park Geun-hye declared, “We must not give up.”
YTN quoted surviving students describing a chaotic scene in which passengers tripped and bumped into one another and luggage was tossed about as the ship leaned precariously. People jumped into the water in life jackets and swam to fishing boats that had arrived near the sinking ship, they said. The passengers were wrapped in blankets and taken to shelters and hospitals in nearby ports.
Photo
The 6,825-ton ferry had been sailing from Incheon, a port west of Seoul, to Jeju, roughly 60 miles off the southern coast of South Korea, when it sent a distress signal on Wednesday morning. Video showed rescuers scaling the side of the listing ship, pulling out survivors and placing them in baskets lowered by helicopters.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
