Khaula Sawah, board member and former CEO of the Union of Medical Care and Relief Organizations (UOSSM), said her field team in Idlib had reported that while still unconfirmed, doctors believe -- based on the symptoms of the patients -- that some form of organophosphate nerve agent was used.
Someone made the announcement telling passengers to stay in place. Then, he said, he heard a loud bang.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
NORTH KOREA Seoul Incheon SOUTH KOREA Yellow Sea Ferry route JINDO Approximate site of ferry sinking JEJU 50 MILES
Of the 462 people aboard, 325 were students from Danwon High School in Ansan, about 20 miles south of Seoul. By midnight, about 75 of the students had been rescued. They had been on an overnight voyage to Jeju, a popular resort island, where they were scheduled for a four-day field trip and sightseeing.
Prince Harry once wore a Nazi commandant costume to a party. And in 2006, officials specifically warned fans traveling to Germany for a soccer match not to do things like shout “Sieg heil” at the referees, or to put their fingers under their noses in a way meant to evoke Hitler’s mustache. Perhaps the favorite television episode here is one on “Fawlty Towers” when a hotel owner, played (again) by Mr. Cleese, responds to a group of German guests by lapsing into xenophobic insanity, goose-stepping around the dining room and referring to prawn cocktail as “prawn Goebbels.” (“You started it,” he says when the traumatized customers object. “You invaded Poland.”)
"The symptoms were pale skin, sweating, narrow or pin-eye pupils, very intense respiratory detachments. Those symptoms match the usage of Sarin," said a doctor in a hospital close to Khan Sheikhoun, who cannot be named for security reasons.
Senior White House officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss the government’s view, said Russia was trying to protect Syria, its closest ally in the Middle East, from culpability. Syrian government forces carried out the attack, as they had near Damascus in 2013, the American officials said, to retaliate against rebels who were threatening government-held territory.
Conditions are not ideal for the rescue effort, with potentially strong winds, fog and tidal currents making things difficult for ships and divers, maritime expert Kim Petersen told CNN.  However he also sounded some hope that air pockets, also known as "voids", could provide those on board with a chance of survival.
But travel around England, talking to older people, and you find below the surface a sense of unease, of distrust. Even people who believe that Britain should stay in the European Union, for economic and trading purposes, do not feel very European.
