'Attack on democracy'
In response, Carles Puigdemont, the leader of Catalonia, told Catalan television that no politician or court in Madrid could stop the referendum.
"I can't imagine Spain without Catalonia and Catalonia without Spain. I don't want to see it," he said at a recent press conference in Prague, according to Bloomberg
So far, so absurd. No poll has yet delivered a clear majority of Catalans for independence. Barcelona has proceeded within accepted democratic norms and without recourse to violence – unlike Madrid in the government’s efforts to stop the recent referendum.
“We want to talk – as people do in established democracies – about the problem facing the majority of Catalan people who want to begin their journey as an independent country in Europe. The suspension of the political mandate received at the ballot box on 1 October shows our firm desire to find a solution and not confrontation.”
There are certainly some people who have been brainwashed by Russian TV channels (Ukrainian stations have been cut off in Crimea) and do believe in lies that in Russia Crimea will be given all kinds of advantages and privileges. But also consider that the vote took place under the guns of Russian troops and residents were given less than two weeks to prepare. It is unsafe to be pro-Ukrainian in Crimea right now, as the region is controlled by Russian military and hired thugs.
Mr. Francken is a member of the New Flemish Alliance party, which favors Flemish independence from the rest of Belgium and has historically had strong links to the Catalan separatists as a kindred movement. This month, members of the alliance hung the Catalan independence flag — the Estelada — in the Belgian Parliament, in a gesture of support.
"This assault on freedom of expression must be immediately investigated and those responsible must be prosecuted. Anything less will only open the door to further attacks against media professionals and activists," said Heather McGill, Ukraine researcher at Amnesty International.
“If independence had indeed been declared,” Mr. Martinez added, “we would find ourselves facing a political dead end.”
Carles Mundo, Catalonia's Minister of Justice, told reporters there was no minimum participation level required for the referendum result to be binding.
