Instead, the West should offer Ukraine's interim government financial support and encourage it "not to let itself be provoked into a war with Russia as Georgia was in 2008."
Today’s critics in Beijing are correct, however, in suggesting that Britain, which took over Hong Kong in 1842, came late to the democracy game. Britain’s democratic impulses in the 1950s came after it had been ejected from India and the country was trying to head off revolts in several colonies. “It was at a time when Britain was introducing democracy in many of its colonies around the world, and the idea was Hong Kong should be treated the same,” said Danny Gittings, an assistant professor of law at the University of Hong Kong.
And in a speech on the island's national day October 10, he urged Xi to introduce democracy for his 1.3 billion people -- letting free elections in Hong Kong be the first step. Ma has also encouraged mainland Chinese exchange students to study in Taiwan to experience its open society. 
Facebook Twitter Pinterest A woman picks up a yellow ribbon - a symbol of the Hong Kong pro-democracy movement. Photograph: ALEX OGLE/AFP/Getty Images
On another occasion he compared the need for public nomination to picking lunch, saying that imposing tight controls on candidates for the role of chief executive was like offering people the chance to eat at one of two shopping centres.
Several of the young people occupying the business district told CNN they were going to stay overnight. 
"Many people in Taiwan want independence," said a young woman called Febie who manages a small cafe in Taipei, Taiwan's capital. "But that's impossible without the backing of other powerful countries, like the United States. I still think President Ma should be stronger against China."
Patten, the last British governor of Hong Kong before the 1997 handover, said China’s actions were “spit in the face” of the 1984 Joint Declaration on the conditions under which Hong Kong would be handed over.
His greatest success as a campaigner may have been to prove that his role has its limits, because so many more people have been drawn in.
Nobody knew when, or if, the protest would occur, but in August Beijing passed a reform framework to stipulate universal suffrage on its own terms – only two or three committee-vetted candidates who “love the country” would be allowed to run. Activists considered this the last straw. Students began a class boycott last Monday and, galvanised by a city-wide surge in support, staged a large-scale protest outside of the city government headquarters on Friday night. Occupy Central mobilised on Sunday. The rest is unfolding as you read.
