European leaders are troubled by the prospect of a drawn-out exit inducing deeper financial and economic turmoil, a concern increasingly prevalent in London as well. On Monday morning, George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, tried to calm the markets, citing Britain’s underlying economic strengths, the greater resilience of its financial system after the 2007-8 crisis, and the readiness of the Bank of England to step in.
Could the U.K. hold another Brexit vote?
Related: Can globalization survive 'Brexit' and Trump?
Meeting in Berlin, Ms. Merkel, President François Hollande of France and Prime Minister Matteo Renzi of Italy said there would be no discussions, formal or informal, over Britain’s withdrawal until it formally invokes Article 50, the provision in the bloc’s governing treaty that sets out the process for a withdrawal.
A decision on the timetable is expected by Wednesday, amid increased speculation that Britain could have a general election this year, after giving the Conservatives a five-year term in May 2015.
“Taking steps to provide liquidity to small firms could be a big factor in economic stimulus steps that we compile.”
The chancellor's assessment that more austerity will be needed is the latest body blow to hopes that Britain's economy would be relatively unscathed by a decision to leave the EU.
Sources said the government was willing to spend at least 10tn yen ($98bn) due to worries about exports, domestic demand and Japanese firms operating in Britain.
Hours before the announcement, Donald Tusk, the president of the European council, appealed to Puigdemont to step back from a unilateral declaration of independence and begin dialogue with the Spanish prime minister, Mariano Rajoy.
Mr. Johnson is seen as the front-runner to replace Mr. Cameron as leader of the Conservatives, but he has made many enemies. The home secretary, Theresa May, who is in charge of domestic security and who advocated remaining in the European Union, has emerged as perhaps the most credible alternative.
