Play Video 0:27 Nicola Sturgeon mocks Theresa May with box of Strepsils – video
The latest YouGov poll put SNP support at 42%, which would lose it six Holyrood seats, and found support for independence was ebbing away, with more voters who backed independence in 2014 now unwilling to support a quick fresh referendum.
“If the last year has taught us anything it is this: in an age of rapid global change we cannot afford to be bystanders. That means speaking up for universal democratic rights,” she told delegates, many of whom feel subdued after the party lost 21 Westminster seats in June, forcing Sturgeon to drop her demands for a new independence vote by spring 2019.
Blackford is working with the party’s financial adviser, Andrew Wilson, on a report on Scotland’s economic and fiscal options intended to answer significant questions avoided by Alex Salmond, the former first minister, in the 2014 referendum campaign.
Dauvit Broun, a professor of Scottish history at the University of Glasgow, says one driving force for the vote is the widening gulf between the policies pursued by the coalition UK government in Westminster, led by the Conservative Party under Cameron since 2010, and what the Scottish people want.
But the three main parties in Westminster -- David Cameron's Conservatives, their coalition partners the Liberal Democrats, and Labour -- have all said this won't be an option. The Scottish government responded that this was "bullying" from Westminster.
This is another big but unresolved question. Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond, leader of the Scottish National Party, has said he wants Scotland to continue to use the pound in a currency union with the rest of the United Kingdom.
It also means that the residents of England, Wales and Northern Ireland get no vote on a historic change to the makeup of the United Kingdom.
This means English or Welsh citizens who reside in Scotland can take part. But Scots who are living elsewhere in the United Kingdom or overseas will not be entitled to cast a ballot.
Thanks to a bill passed last year extending the vote to 16- and 17-year-olds, essentially everyone living in Scotland who is 16 or older on the date of the referendum will be able to vote. 
