On Monday, Mr. Trump’s administration signaled that it no longer saw the departure of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria as a priority. On Tuesday, Mr. Assad appeared to unleash one of the worst chemical attacks of the war.
A doctor in a hospital close to Khan Sheikhoun told CNN: "Today around 7:30 a.m., about 125 ... arrived to our hospital. Twenty-five of them were already dead, 70% to 80% of the wounded people were kids and women.
The Syrian Coalition, an umbrella opposition group, referred to the suspected chemical attack as a "crime similar to that in Eastern Ghouta in 2013 that the international community allowed to pass without accountability or punishment."
"Once the regime is sure that the attacks won't trigger any sort of reaction from the international community, I believe the regime will start increasing those attacks."After the Ghouta attack in 2013, Trump had argued vociferously against US military action in Syria. On 7 September of that year, he tweeted: “President Obama, do not attack Syria. There is no upside and tremendous downside. Save your ‘powder’ for another (and more important) day!”
Abdullah, who had common side effects of a nerve gas attack -- blurred vision, a splitting headache and lethargy -- told CNN the scene was chaos. Families died in their homes, and in the streets, children risked exposure looking for their parents.
"The US government is working to ascertain the truth behind this incident, but it has the fingerprints of a regime attack," the official said. "If the Assad regime was indeed responsible for perpetrating this attack, the reported casualty figures would make it the biggest incident like this since the Syrian regime sarin attack in August 2013 against the Damascus suburbs."
The Ghouta attack prompted Obama to ask Congress to authorize military action against Syria in 2013. Shortly after, Syria agreed to a Russian proposal to give up control of its chemical weapons, leading Obama to retreat from threats of military action.

Basma Kodmani, a member of the Syrian opposition, suggested the attack was in fact a direct consequence of the US decision to relax pressure on Assad.
