On Tuesday Puigdemont delivered an ambiguous speech to the Catalan parliament, saying that Catalonia had won the right to declare a republic following a disputed October 1 referendum. But he said the declaration would be suspended, in order to allow for dialogue.
• Giles Tremlett reveals that in the Catalonia v Spain impasse: “At stake are five centuries of coexistence with the rest of Spain.” Indeed: not dissimilar to the centuries of coexistence between Ireland and England that inspired the Easter Rising of 1916.
“Having better macroeconomic data doesn’t mean people have more to spend and feel better off,” said Josep Borrell, a Catalan economist and a former leader of Spain’s Socialist party.
"The government had to enforce Article 155. It wasn't our desire, nor our intention. It never was," Rajoy said. "But in this situation, no government of any democratic country can accept that the law is ignored."
Hundreds of thousands have attended rallies to demand their region break from Spain in recent weeks.
Puigdemont's speech in the Catalan Parliament Tuesday indicates he has rolled the dice, arguably a little late, that policy -- not police -- is the path to separation. Rajoy's answer from Madrid points to the reverse being on his mind, which makes EU mediation to manage the separatist genie all the more urgent.
No one should doubt the Yes campaign’s skill at campaigning, or using the clout of the regional government’s resources, including universities and schools, for PR advantage. But public relations can’t heal a divided region and nor, alas, can Madrid’s fumbling response to the challenge. Arresting some Catalan politicians, threatening more arrests and holding out the possibility of suspending the devolved government may be one response to this crisis. But, at that PR level, it stokes the cynical claim that, even today, Franco equals Spain and Spain equals Franco. Any hint of oppression lite can be used to advantage.
The alliance has never figured out how to handle the countries, like Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia, stuck between Russia and NATO, said James Goldgeier, dean of the School of International Service at American University. “We never came up with a solution for the insecurity of that area, and we still don’t have one,” he said. “We’ve known for a long time that relations with the United States are not that important to Putin, and making sure Ukraine doesn’t go West is a lot more important to him.”
"He announced a de facto coup d'etat with which he aims to take over Catalan institutions," Forcadell said Saturday.
Dastis denied that Madrid would need to send in large numbers of police or the military to impose direct rule.
