David Campbell Bannerman, a Tory MEP who co-chairs Conservatives for Britain with Baker, said a remain victory won by causing panic on the markets “would lead to an immediate leadership challenge”.
Liam Fox, a former defence secretary and out campaigner, added: “A punishment budget would be rejected by both sides of the House of Commons. It would damage the chancellor’s credibility and would be putting his own position in jeopardy.
“I might be part of the E.U., but I live on an island,” said Alan Lyon, 49, who shovels cullet — broken glass — in a glass factory. Mr. Lyon’s great-great-grandfather lost both legs in World War I; his grandfather fought in World War II. “We couldn’t mention Germany or France around him, he hated them so much,” he said.
Armenia
But perhaps no one is more admired in Ukraine's east than the country's number one oligarch, Rinat Akhmetov. Worth an estimated $15.4bn, according to Forbes, Akhmetov has not become politically involved, although he has entered the debate about the country's future. He is the owner of one of Ukraine's top two football clubs, Shakhtar Donetsk, and the biggest player in the Donbas region mining industry. In 2011 he paid a whopping £136.4m for a penthouse at One Hyde Park in London.
Yet, in the end, the cumulative impact of newspapers’ coverage about Europe is probably more important that any eve-of-referendum-day endorsement for either side.
The academic said that the trauma of past military interventions, and not sympathy for the government, drove people to oppose Friday night’s bloody coup attempt.
Although most of Ukraine's business elite have strong ties with Moscow, if the east of the country were to fall under the influence of the Kremlin then Ukraine's billionaires would quickly be overrun by their wealthier and better connected Russian counterparts. "The Ukrainian oligarchs have no political influence over Putin," says Leshchenko. "If the east were to secede, their businesses would be snatched. They would become the small businessmen of a Russian province".
Prince Harry once wore a Nazi commandant costume to a party. And in 2006, officials specifically warned fans traveling to Germany for a soccer match not to do things like shout “Sieg heil” at the referees, or to put their fingers under their noses in a way meant to evoke Hitler’s mustache. Perhaps the favorite television episode here is one on “Fawlty Towers” when a hotel owner, played (again) by Mr. Cleese, responds to a group of German guests by lapsing into xenophobic insanity, goose-stepping around the dining room and referring to prawn cocktail as “prawn Goebbels.” (“You started it,” he says when the traumatized customers object. “You invaded Poland.”)
Photo
