The report comes the same month the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed a new round of sanctions on North Korea in response to the testing of two ballistic missiles in July that experts say may be able to reach the United States.
Such is the state of political discourse these days in the United States, where every issue -- particularly one that dominates media headlines -- becomes fair game for partisan attack.
While hosting CNN's Crossfire this week, I said: "Republicans are practically cheering for Vladimir Putin today. He's given them a new excuse to bash President Obama."  
President Obama arrived in Seoul on Friday to news that North Korea may be counting down to a nuclear weapons test.
Abe's government have sought closer ties with the United States while working to change Japan's post-World War II constitution to allow the country to actively defend itself against external threats.
      Kim Young-sook runs a small restaurant near the school. She dressed in black and wept as she spoke with CNN, explaining that students are regular customers. 
"Can you think of any place in the world, any place where we are better off now than we were when he came to office?" Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell said Wednesday of President Barack Obama.  "He has acted in such a way almost amounting to passivity in many instances."
While the White House says diplomacy is preferred when it comes to dealing with Pyongyang, talks will not be unconditional and a military option remains "on the table."
2) Russia retreats:  Unlikely.  They didn't steam into Crimea just for a getaway weekend.  The Russians have important assets to protect there, and that does not necessarily mean the 60% of the Crimean population that grew up speaking Russian.  The vaunted Black Sea Fleet counts on its Sevastopol port for year-round access (via Istanbul) to the warm waters of the Mediterranean.  Arguably, the fear of losing that route to an unfriendly Ukrainian government is what drove Russia to take Crimea in the first place.   
Kerry's visit to Kiev was a powerful moment. His unvarnished message to Putin, if backed by action, was a respectable start. The U.S. would prefer to see this crisis resolved through negotiations, he declared, but if Russia chooses not to do so, Washington's and its partners "will isolate Russia politically, diplomatically and economically."  Already the EU is offering Ukraine an aid package comparable to the one Putin used to lure it away. Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel is boosting ties with Poland and the Baltic States, and economic sanctions are under discussion.
