Voters proudly proclaimed their support for rejoining Russia as they stood in line in dreary weather to vote. However, one, who was too afraid to speak to CNN on camera,  proclaimed the referendum illegal.
Spanish government spokesperson Inigo Mendez de Vigo said Saturday that Puigdemont's bid for independence had "ended."
Hundreds of thousands have attended rallies to demand their region break from Spain in recent weeks.
On Saturday, nearly half a million people protested in Barcelona, Catalonia's biggest city.
JUST WATCHED Catalan leader explains indepedence position Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Catalan leader explains indepedence position 02:54
“Having better macroeconomic data doesn’t mean people have more to spend and feel better off,” said Josep Borrell, a Catalan economist and a former leader of Spain’s Socialist party.
No one should doubt the Yes campaign’s skill at campaigning, or using the clout of the regional government’s resources, including universities and schools, for PR advantage. But public relations can’t heal a divided region and nor, alas, can Madrid’s fumbling response to the challenge. Arresting some Catalan politicians, threatening more arrests and holding out the possibility of suspending the devolved government may be one response to this crisis. But, at that PR level, it stokes the cynical claim that, even today, Franco equals Spain and Spain equals Franco. Any hint of oppression lite can be used to advantage.
He called on the Catalan people to ignore the current regional authorities, including the police, once Madrid declared direct rule and said that new elections should bring in new leaders.
Noting a "temptation to see everything through the lens of the next election cycle," Carney said "that's pretty flaccid thinking."
“That’s the trap: they threaten to apply 155 when they’re already applying it illegally,” the region’s foreign minister, Raül Romeva, told the Observer on Saturday. “They’re already intervening in our finances but they’re doing it by the back door. And the presence in Catalonia of the Guardia Civil and the national police is illegal. They’re saying they’re defending the rules but they’re the ones breaking their own rules.”
