Currently, the NBA has no rules prohibiting a foreign company from owning an NBA team.
Alexander Kliment, director of Russia research and emerging markets at Eurasia Group, a global political risk and consulting firm, said there is a basic agreement between Putin and oligarchs permitting them to make money as long as they stay out of government. They're also expected to comply with government demands, he said. 
When the Parliament took another symbolic vote, demanding that Western nations imposing sanctions on Russia include all Duma members, the deputies around him also complained about his choice, he said.
"Putin has his second shot at the dacha, and the goal is wide open," said Maik Lvovskiy, an investigative journalist who followed the 2004 paper trail that led all the way from Yalta to Moscow. "If he pursued it before, then I can't see why he wouldn't take it now; there are absolutely no obstacles in his way at all. He can pretty much walk straight through the front door," Lvovskiy said.
Prokhorov called the move "an outstanding opportunity to use NBA technologies for the step-by-step development of basketball in Russia," according to ITAR-Tass.
Russia's intervention in Ukraine's Crimea region has sparked the biggest East-West confrontation since the end of the Cold War.
In recent weeks, Washington has imposed sanctions on senior Russian officials and what officials called "cronies" of Putin, as well as a bank, after warning Putin against annexing Crimea from Ukraine.
"Frankly speaking, we don't see any other way for the steady development of the Ukrainian state apart from as a federation," he added. Under the Russian plan, which Barack Obama and Vladimir Putin reportedly discussed in a phone call initiated by Moscow on Friday, each region would have control of its economy, taxes, culture, language, education and "external economic and cultural connections with neighbouring countries or regions," Lavrov said.
At the time, some saw him as too close to the regime in power. Many Russians suspected the Kremlin put Prokhorov up to garner some legitimate votes without being a true threat to Putin, giving the impression that the contest was fair.
Action star has appeared in state-owned Russian media to back his personal friend the president and blast the west's anti-Putin stance on Ukraine
