“While we continue to monitor the terrible situation, it is clear that this is how Bashar al-Assad operates: with brutal, unabashed barbarism,” the former oil executive said.
Shuffling around in the hospital parking lot, several of Mr. Youssef’s relatives buried themselves in their phones, watching the videos of the morning’s atrocities over and over.
Tillerson declared during a visit to Turkey this week that the “longer-term status of President Assad will be decided by the Syrian people”. On Thursday, Haley told reporters: “You pick and choose your battles ... And when we’re looking at this, it’s about changing up priorities, and our priority is no longer to sit and focus on getting Assad out.”
The rebel-held area’s minister of health, Mohamad Firas Al-Jundi, said in an online video that hospitals and clinics were overwhelmed. He said he had been in a field hospital at 7:30 a.m. when over 100 people arrived injured or sickened; many others, he said, were sent to other clinics, with some left lying in the corridors.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
After the Ghouta attack in 2013, Trump had argued vociferously against US military action in Syria. On 7 September of that year, he tweeted: “President Obama, do not attack Syria. There is no upside and tremendous downside. Save your ‘powder’ for another (and more important) day!”
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
The Idlib massacre has dramatically underlined another hole in the administration’s approach: a failure to appreciate the degree to which Assad’s brutality was a driver of extremism.
The Syrian military said it “categorically denied” responsibility. Russia, which has heavily backed the Syrian regime, said its planes were not operating near Idlib. Early on Wednesday, the Russian defence ministry claimed a Syrian airstrike had hit a “terrorist warehouse” containing an arsenal of “toxic substances” destined for fighters in Iraq. The ministry did not state if the attack was deliberate.
Symptoms, he said, included suffocation, fluid in the lungs with foam coming from the mouth, unconsciousness, spasms and paralysis.
