London (CNN) Britain will be led by a woman prime minister through its complicated divorce with the European Union, after Conservative MPs voted the sole remaining male candidate out of the race to succeed David Cameron Thursday.
For Moscow, Crimea is much more important than South Ossetia, Abkhazia or Transnistria. First, Crimea became Ukrainian territory only in 1954 when the Soviet Union's leader Nikita Khrushchev gave it to Kiev under the overall authority of the Soviet Union. Its loss after the disintegration of the Soviet Union was a major blow to leaders in Moscow. 
With the emergence of pro-Russian military groups and the looming threat of deployments from across the border, the question of who exactly is now in charge here is unclear. Yesterday Sevastopol's new mayor, Aleksei Chaliy, pledged to subordinate himself to the local security forces – among them, presumably, the Night Wolves.
He sent Secretary of State John Kerry to Kiev on Tuesday to forcefully condemn Russia for seizing effective military control of the Crimea region.
The tensions come as Ukraine's lawmakers scramble to put together a new unity government amid continued instability after Yanukovych's ouster. 
But those myths are collapsing; that is what the 2014 protests were all about. Both eastern and western camps had a chance at ruling, and both failed. In doing so, they showed Ukrainians that the challenge was not between one region or another, but between the corrupt at the top and the people, whatever region they are from. Politicians today are finally being asked for plans of action that will actually achieve things, rather than populist slogans or ideological myths.
Chancellor Angela Merkel was so concerned about the rising tension in the Crimean peninsula that she and Putin held a conversation, and in it, she proposed a "fact-finding mission" to Ukraine and a political dialogue.
Russia's Foreign Ministry has accused Ukraine's lawmakers of discriminating against ethnic Russians by excluding them from the reform process.
Photo
Victoria Khudyakova said she also had voted to join Russia, which she sees as being "spiritually close" to Crimea. "For me, Russia is an opportunity for our Crimea to develop, to bloom. And I believe that it will be so," she said. 
