Although regional institutions were suspended from 1938 to 1977, Catalan bourgeois elites have displayed remarkable survival instincts, entering into alliances with the forces of the Spanish right whenever they deemed it necessary to maintain order. Catalan conservative nationalists have ruled the region for more than three decades in the democratic period. These same nationalists have voted in favour of about half of the national budgets during this period. If changes are to be made in Spain’s federal structure, they shouldn’t be based upon the false assumption that Catalonia has had no role in national politics.
But when given a simple binary choice on independence, 48.7% say they want Catalonia to break away from Spain, while 43.6% do not. The rest are undecided.
Many people argue that Madrid would have been smarter to simply allow the referendum. It would almost certainly have won if it ensured that there were more than two options on the ballot.
Catalan nationalism has featured clear appeals to ethnicity, and any reader can search on the internet for dog-whistle or outright supremacist statements. Common messages have included “Spain steals from us”, “Subsidised Spain lives off productive Catalonia”, or posters showing ragged kids from southern Spain living off the taxes paid by the Catalan middle class.
Satirical article saying Spanish riot police took cocaine lands editor in court Read more
It's unlikely Rajoy will be receptive to the appeal. He has refused to meet with Puigdemont, who went to Brussels after Spanish authorities announced they were seeking his arrest . Rajoy says he will meet only with leaders of the pro-unity Ciutadans (Citizens) party.Photo
The move to arrest the officers came after the police successfully cleared one of Hong Kong’s busiest shopping streets of encamped protesters on Wednesday. But only hours later, demonstrators gathered again in the Mong Kok neighborhood, only a short distance away from the original encampment on Nathan Road.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Late in the evening, hundreds of police officers and demonstrators faced off on Sai Yeung Choi Street, just one block east of Nathan Road, which had been closed to traffic almost continuously for the past two months as protesters settled in a tent city.
