In a dramatic announcement two days before the final vote, Macron’s team said thousands of its campaign emails had been released in a major hacking operation. Cybersecurity analysts suggested the operation might have been undertaken by Russia-affiliated groups. Moscow and Russian news outlets had rejected any allegations of interference.
Crimea belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine, which was then part of the Soviet Union. The region has a majority ethnic Russian population and other historic ties to Russia.
Russia set out a series of tough conditions on Sunday night for agreeing a diplomatic solution to the crisis over its annexation of Crimea, demanding that the US and its European partners accept its proposal that ethnic Russian regions of eastern and southern Ukraine be given extensive autonomous powers independent of Kiev.
But Macron said France would show “no weakness” if chemical weapons were used, and would immediately respond.
Poroshenko, who also owns the popular Channel 5 television station and has served as foreign minister, already leads in the polls for the presidential election and is seen as likely to beat Tymoshenko, who declared this week that she will "be the candidate of Ukrainian unity".
The Kremlin said a new blockade would “significantly complicate the living conditions for the region’s residents, impeding their movement and normal trade and economic activities,” and it urged negotiations to address the situation.
"Entrepreneurs need to understand their responsibility," Putin told a group of Russian businessmen last week. "Our priority stance is that Russian companies have to be registered here, in their home country and have a transparent ownership structure."
"I prefer to say that we are not pointing our tanks at the Russians but merely looking toward our brothers in case they advance in friendship," he said. The major said he could scarcely believe he was on high alert to battle troops from Moscow. 
And even if this can be overcome, in the end Poland and Ukraine, rather than finding mutual love for each other, might well start a war over historical memory, for which neither lacks pretexts. We have seen the history books reopened on Crimea; there is no reason they cannot be reopened on Polish-Ukrainian tensions as well.
Farage strongly opposed any British military involvement in Syria at the time of the parliamentary vote last summer.
