It is not clear when the European commission will deliver its battle plan for expanded sanctions but there is an acute feeling among commission officials that Brussels has been handed a poison chalice. They said as soon as the plans are published or leaked, the Russians will know what to expect or fear and will get their retaliation in pre-emptively, triggering a much bigger crisis between Europe and Russia.
On March 1, Maidan-affiliated activists were attacked by forces imported from Russia. Among the hundred or so injured was one of Ukraine’s most beloved poets, Serhiy Zhadan, whose head was sliced open in two places. The Russian flag was raised over buildings housing local governments. Just a few hours later videos appeared on YouTube showing these Russian agitators divvying up the money they were getting for their performances.
If the current conflict does not spread to other parts of eastern Ukraine -- where there is a sizable population that is demanding closer ties to Russia -- then Crimea could join the ranks of other "frozen conflicts" in the post-Soviet space. 
Qin didn't elaborate on that point, but earlier in his statement, Qin spoke of Ukraine and said China condemns "the recent extreme and violent acts there and have been urging the relevant parties in Ukraine to resolve their internal disputes peacefully within the legal framework so as to safeguard the lawful rights and interests of all ethnic communities in Ukraine and restore normal social order at an early date."
While the Americans have been much more open in spelling out their plans, the Europeans complain that it is easier for Washington because it has much less to lose, with US-Russian trade volumes barely one-twelfth of that between the EU and Russia.
Dmitry Yarosh
And it has not only been Ukraine that has recently faced economic pressure to toe the line. For Kiev that meant tighter customs controls last year, when Ukraine was flirting with an association with the EU. But Belarus too, although on a far lesser scale, has been punished in the recent past for seeking economic aid from China.
Orobets said one of Ukraine's biggest challenges is getting its financial house in order. 
"They want to have their assets more accessible if needed," one official said. "This will allow for an expedited response."
Top Ukrainian officials, including the acting President and prime minister, have said they are prepared to defend the country. They've also said that any invasion would be illegitimate, a response echoed by the United States, which has told Russia to respect Ukraine's sovereignty. 
