
The humble brolly is taking on a frontline role as demonstrators try to protect themselves from the police’s pepper spray
Hong Kong retains a legal system which closely mirrors the British one, another holdover from the colonial era, but one which prizes transparency and due process and is largely welcomed by the populace.
The son of a police officer, Leung was born in Hong Kong in 1954, and spent much of his career as a rising star in the city’s real-estate sector. DTZ first partnered with Leung in 1999, according to the firm’s website.
Another target of criticism for pro-China politicians and media in Hong Kong is the United States Consulate, which is often depicted as a base for conducting surveillance and espionage to target China, with more than 1,000 American employees. That image was reinforced by Edward J. Snowden, the former National Security Agency contractor who briefly sought refuge in Hong Kong and told a local newspaper that the United States had hacked into Pacnet, a global telecommunications firm in Hong Kong with ties to mainland China’s top mobile operators.
The police generally have the trust of the population -- although how this trust will be affected by the events of the past few days remains to be seen.
C.Y. Leung told CNN that fears that the nominating process for the 2017 election were too restrictive were "unfounded."
"The rouble is falling as is the Russian market. There could be a lot of potential economic damage for Russia from this."
European diplomats in Kiev fear Putin's irredentist adventure isn't over yet. One said: "Russia has completed massive preparations for an all-out invasion. Whether they will execute it is still unclear. Unfortunately I don't see factors that would deter them from doing so. Their propaganda gear is on uncompromising confrontation with the entire western world now, and they expect no real consequences."
Its top political post – that of chief executive – is chosen by a “nominating committee” of 1,200 people, most of them from pro-Beijing elites. Yet when Beijing regained control over the city, it promised that the region would be able to elect its top leader by universal suffrage by 2017. The group guiding the current protests – set up 18 months ago by two professors and a baptist minister under the banner Occupy Central with Love and Peace — threatened to paralyse the city’s central business district if Beijing broke its word.
