"All police in Ukraine have been ordered to be prepared," acting Interior Minister Arsen Avakov wrote on his Facebook page. "Orders have been issued to create a cordon around the Parliament in Crimea and to avoid shooting and violence."
Still, the Catalan government says it can hold the vote, and recently announced that it had stored about 6,000 ballot boxes in a secret location.
But Yanukovych claims he's still in charge, saying he was forced to leave Kiev because of a "coup."
At the very moment Koum and Mark Zuckerberg were finalizing their deal, female entrepreneurs in Ukraine were preparing for an event called Startup Weekend Kyiv, meant to take place in the capital last weekend. The group's website now reads: "Due to political turmoil this event has been postponed."   Mired in corruption, kleptocracy and authoritarianism, Ukraine has not nurtured the Koums of its future.
"We believe that everybody now needs to step back and avoid any kind of provocations, and we want to see in the next days ahead obviously that the choices Russia makes conform to this affirmation that we received today," he said after a phone conversation with Lavrov. 
Here are some of the questions at play, with a look at how key players are weighing in:
Former world champion heavyweight boxer Vitali Klitschko has been the most well-known opposition figure during the crisis. He heads the Ukrainian Democratic Alliance for Reforms party. There's also Arseniy Yatsenyuk, a former foreign minister.
Ukraine, meanwhile, is one of the world's top exporters of corn and wheat, whose prices could rise on concern those exports could come to a halt.
In Georgia, Russia backed secessionist bids in the South Ossetia and Abkhazia regions in sovereignty disputes that remain unresolved. The United States and European Union consider the regions part of Georgia.
John Herbst, a former U.S. ambassador to Ukraine in the administration of Republican President George W. Bush, suggested one possible military response would be for NATO to agree to deploy additional forces in countries with significant Russian populations.
