Universities Denounce Xenophobia
The US treasury secretary, Jack Lew, told CNBC on Monday: “Unilateral action to intervene would be destabilising.”
At the Home Office, she resisted pressure from the American government to extradite Gary McKinnon, a Briton accused of computer hacking, citing human rights concerns. But she negotiated a treaty with Jordan that allowed Britain to extradite Abu Qatada, a radical Islamic preacher. His extradition had been obstructed by the European Court of Human Rights, which feared he might face torture in Jordan.
The report follows a clutch of business surveys this week suggesting the vote to leave the EU could derail Britain’s economy following relatively strong economic growth in the run-up to the referendum. GDP was revealed to be up 0.6% in the second quarter, greater than the 0.4% growth seen in the previous three months, but more timely indicators pointed to falling confidence among car factories, high street stores and in the construction industry.
The third uncertainty is Britain’s negotiating objectives. Will it seek full access to the single market – the Norway option – or to be part of it (the Swiss option)? Will it go for the Canadian low tariff option, or just trade with Europe on the same terms that all World Trade Organisation members do?
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
In this Tory political game, the people of Ireland, our peace, economy and institutions, would all become collateral damage. By its reckless action, the British government has set aside the democratic consent that was central to the Good Friday Agreement and set a course that would fundamentally alter the relationships between the North and South of Ireland, and between Ireland and Britain.
The poll of 410 firms found that UK manufacturers’ average confidence score just before the referendum was 6.37 out of a possible 10 points, and had declined to 5.24 following the vote.
Ms. May is expected to take a tough stance on immigration in part because she is politically vulnerable on the issue. As home secretary, she failed to fulfill a Conservative pledge to control the number of people arriving in Britain. The numbers persistently exceeded targets and included arrivals of non-Europeans, which the government had the power to curb.

