The IMF predicts the UK economy will grow 1.7% in 2017, 0.9 percentage points lower than it estimated in April. But if the referendum campaign has taught us anything, it is that predictions about what would happen after a leave vote were tricky to get right.“The outlook for investment was uncertain,” the report said. “The majority of firms spoken with did not expect a near-term impact from the referendum result on their capital spending. But around one third expected some negative effects over the next twelve months, with reports of a ‘risk off’ approach to expenditures and some imminent plans for spending slipping.”
“There had been little evidence of any impact on consumer spending on services and non-durable goods, although there were some reports of consumers becoming more hesitant around purchases of higher-value goods.”
The Bank’s findings were backed up by the latest trading report from the retailer John Lewis. It said spending in its department stores and at its Waitrose supermarkets were 3.2% higher in the week ending 16 July than they had been in the same week of 2015.
The pound rose on the foreign exchanges after the Bank’s agents report and the unemployment figures were released. It closed two thirds of a cent higher at just below $1.32.
According to the ONS, there were 31.7 million people in work in the three months ending in May, 176,000 more than for the three months to February 2016 and 624,000 more than for a year earlier.
The government’s preferred measure of unemployment, the internationally agreed measure that looks at those without a job but seeking and available to work, fell by 54,000 in the three months ending in May to its lowest level since early 2008, when the economy was in the early stages of recession.
The ONS said the unemployment rate had edged down from 5% to 4.9% and was last lower in the July to September period of 2005.London (CNN) Theresa May is meeting with German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin Wednesday on her first international trip as Britain's Prime Minister, for talks that she hopes will help smooth Brexit negotiations.
Speaking at a press conference alongside May ahead of the working dinner between two of the world's most powerful women, Merkel said that Britain and Germany had friendly relations and shared values.
