Mr. Puigdemont and other separatists are waging a high-stakes battle with the Spanish government over independence, touched off by an Oct. 1 referendum that the Spanish government says should never have taken place because it violated Spain’s Constitution.
For more than a quarter-century, many of the same men, and a handful of women, have led countless demonstrations with limited visible effect.
5.  What sports event is known as "March Madness"?  How many teams qualify for the tournament?  According to the video, what impact does March Madness have on business productivity in the U.S.?  Why?  
“What I hope for from the elections is a return to common sense. We still have some left,” says Gallego. Balmón, the mayor, says he hopes that neither the pro- nor anti-independence blocs reach an absolute majority so they will have to compromise.
Perhaps Hong Kong should imitate what President Xi Jinping's anti-corruption policies have unleashed on the mainland:
The presence of Mr. Puigdemont created a political problem for Prime Minister Charles Michel of Belgium, who wants to maintain good relations with Spain but must also be mindful of the Flemish separatist party that is part of his governing coalition.
“It is important that we know that there are certain entities, which may be public or private, that try to interfere in national politics, that try to affect and create unstable situations in Europe,” De Cospedal said at a meeting of EU foreign and defence ministers on Monday.
“It shows the growing divisiveness,” said Mr. Cheung, seated under a canopy surrounded by empty bottles, plastic sheets and other debris as the police cleared the site. “Society in general will have to pay a large and growing price for that.”
3.  Can you think of any other natural geologic features, like the ice caves shown in the video, that attract tourists?  Explain.  Have you ever visited any of these kinds of formations?  If so, where did you go and what did you see?  What did you learn from the experience?  
But neither the demonstrators nor authorities have shown any willingness to compromise. Protesters want Beijing to lift its tight restrictions on nominations for the next chief executive in 2017, saying otherwise an election will offer no real choice. Beijing argues that offering Hong Kong residents universal suffrage is in itself a step forward.
