But on Tuesday, when Russian President Vladimir Putin said his country won't make a claim to Crimea, global markets rebounded, the ruble improved, and Russia's main stock index, the Micex, rose 6% after falling 11% a day earlier.
Yanukovych's base of support is in eastern and southern Ukraine, where Russian culture and language predominate. In that region, most people are suspicious of the Europe-leaning views of their counterparts in western Ukraine, who were at the heart of the anti-government protests that filled central Kiev.
Tension dramatically mounted in Ukraine's Crimea region Friday as its ambassador to the United Nations warned Russia against any further violation of its territorial borders, a warning that came as the United States urged Russia to pull back from the region or face possible consequences. 
"It is China's long-standing position not to interfere in others' internal affairs," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Qin Gang said. "We respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine."
"The situation is highly complicated and sensitive, affecting both regional and entire global situations," said the statement attributed to Xi. "I believe Russia can coordinate with all sides, use political means to resolve the issue, and maintain peace and stability for the region and the world. China supports conciliatory measures from the international community that help mitigate the situation."
In a statement on the Parliament website, he dismissed the local media reports as "rumors," saying they were "a provocation aimed at discrediting and de-legitimizing the Crimean parliament."
On 18 February, violence escalated with policemen being shot, and riot police moving in to clear the peaceful protest camp. According to the health ministr, 77 people were killed in 48 hours and nearly 600 wounded. Many people joined the protest to rid a president they believed wasn’t serving them and merely his own, and Moscow’s, interests.
Sergeyev accused Russia of violating its military agreement by blocking Ukrainian security forces, including its border guards and police, in the region. 
Bulatov, a 35-year-old businessman, was the leader of Avtomaidan (car maidan), a mobile patrol group who used their cars to protect the Euromaidan protesters from attacks bytitushki [a new slang term for government-hired thugs] roaming Kiev.
Lawmakers face the challenge of forming a body that genuinely represents of all the main political parties, despite their widely divergent views, and includes technical experts and some of the people's heroes from the protests in Independence Square. 
