From the European Central Bank’s point of view, low interest rates are the whole point. The bank set a precedent for negative interest rates two years ago when it began charging banks to keep money in its virtual vaults, instead of paying them interest as it did in the past. The so-called negative deposit rate is currently minus 0.4 percent.
Somehow they’ve managed to draw a line on immigration that allows them to court those descended from the former empire – the “good migrants”. As the referendum looms ever closer, the focus has moved to “bad migrants” from the EU, who are accused of scrounging or “taking our jobs”, though the relentless fixation on immigration as the source of all our problems remains the same.
The IMF, which has warned of a slowdown in the global economy, urged British policymakers to be on alert for economic shocks and even raised the prospect of a UK interest rate cut.
The resulting uncertainty would hit spending and financial markets, it said, estimating that even under a relatively benign scenario in which the UK negotiated a trade status similar to that between Norway and the EU, output would fall by 1.5% by 2019, compared with where it would be under continued EU membership.
Under that scenario, the UK would fall into recession in 2017, IMF officials said. “The implication would be negative growth in 2017,” said one official briefing reporters in a conference call.
Newland, Worcestershire
It is reasonable to assume, given the expectations implied by the market pricing at present, that after a Brexit vote the pound would fall by at least 15% and possibly more than 20%, from its present level of $1.46 to below $1.15 (which would be between 25% and 30% below its pre-referendum trading range of $1.50 to $1.60). If sterling fell to this level, then ironically one pound would be worth about one euro – a method of “joining the euro” that nobody in Britain would want.
And most economists do not see any risk that inflation will pick up soon, anyway. The global economy is simply too weak. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development has warned that the world is locked in a “low-growth trap.” The International Monetary Fund lowered its economic expansion forecasts at its last meeting in April. And the Federal Reserve in the United States, meeting on Tuesday and Wednesday, is likely to postpone an interest rate increase.
“These people do not support Erdoğan, but they oppose the idea of a military coup. Turkey has a history of very painful, traumatic military interventions, so I was not surprised to see such united opposition to this attempt.”
For all these reasons I believe the devaluation this time would be more like the one in 1967, when Harold Wilson famously declared that “the pound in your pocket has not been devalued”, but the British people disagreed with him, quickly noticing that the cost of imports and foreign holidays were rising sharply and that their true living standards were going down. Meanwhile financial speculators, back then called the Gnomes of Zurich, were making large profits at Britain’s expense.
