Nadal added that he hoped the two sides would come together to work things out: "We don't want fights, we don't want problems I believe we are much better together and stronger."
Late Monday, the main separatist movements said that they planned protests on Tuesday in Barcelona and other Catalan cities and called for a work stoppage at noon to protest the detention of the two leaders.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
That government has been committed to imposing a judicial solution on to a political problem since 2014, when the government in Barcelona launched a non-binding consultation to gauge the Catalan population’s opinions on independence. We have been witnessing a judicialisation of politics ever since, a process that first started when Catalonia’s former president, vice-president and minister of education were fined and disqualified from politics.
Bay of Biscay FRANCE CATALONIA PORTUGAL Barcelona Madrid SPAIN Mediterranean Sea ALGERIA MOROCCO 200 Miles
The referendum is, frankly, illegal. The highest courts in the land have ruled it unconstitutional. So the leadership’s threat to stage it regardless and declare independence two days after an assumed triumph at the ballot box is profoundly dangerous. There is, currently, no legal way of holding a vote like this, nor any legitimate preparation for holding it. Only 10% of Spaniards support the referendum. Three-quarters of the parties in the Madrid Cortes renounce it. There is no evidence in Catalonia’s own voting patterns to give it momentum. And yet the pictures of chanting crowds we see on televisions from London to Brussels would seem to argue otherwise.
No one should doubt the Yes campaign’s skill at campaigning, or using the clout of the regional government’s resources, including universities and schools, for PR advantage. But public relations can’t heal a divided region and nor, alas, can Madrid’s fumbling response to the challenge. Arresting some Catalan politicians, threatening more arrests and holding out the possibility of suspending the devolved government may be one response to this crisis. But, at that PR level, it stokes the cynical claim that, even today, Franco equals Spain and Spain equals Franco. Any hint of oppression lite can be used to advantage.
Unlike the Brexit outcome, Catalonia’s referendum will not pass democratic muster. But, like Brexit, the possibilities after secession have barely been mentioned, let alone examined. One word – Yes – seems enough. Welcome to a new land, flowing with milk and honey. But if the European Union is alarmed about Britain leaving, it is still more alarmed – from Belgium to France to Italy – about separatist movements destroying cohesion from within. And about a Spain, 40 years after democracy returned, lurching into unpredictable confrontation as other regions – the Basque country, Galicia – stage their own UDIs. There is still room for negotiation here. Madrid has already offered talks on autonomy issues. If the Catalan government can demonstrate a consistent demand and produce properly monitored plans for an eventual referendum, perhaps with a higher ceiling than 50.1%, then that is an approach that might heal the wounds – division, anger, increasing intimidation – already opening in society. The prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, for his part, should try to move cautiously, always open to compromise and using his Socialist and Ciudadanos allies as honest brokers, along with strong, clear EU intervention.
That is what happened in March to Artur Mas, Catalonia’s former leader, who was fined and barred from holding office for two years after a court found him guilty of organizing the last independence referendum.
No dreams, please. Secession, in a democratic Spain inside a democratic Europe, has to be pursued calmly and honestly. You can understand the drumbeats of separation, especially in a region where the actual presence of Madrid governance on the ground in country towns and villages is already vestigial. You can also, as with Brexit, feel the tumult of economic disaster 10 years ago still making waves. But civil unrest and wild words promise only more disaster. It is time for both sides to pause and ponder the damage. It’s time to pull back.