If there is any hesitation, then Barcelona should expect further civil disobedience, said Ms. Ampurdanès of Arran, the far-left youth movement.
Mr. Rajoy also argued that the Catalan separatists had never gotten a majority of votes in an election to justify secession, and so could not claim to be acting in the name of the Catalan people. He told lawmakers Mr. Puigdemont had sought to justify independence based on an “illegal and fraudulent referendum.”
(CNN) Catalonia's separatist government is adamant it will go ahead with a referendum on October 1 to decide if the region should split from Spain, despite the country's highest court banning the vote.
Peter Emerson
Llanrhaeadr-ym-Mochnant, Powys
This region, and would-be country, is profoundly split: by language, by the origins of its population and, if you examine the results map from the last Generalitat elections in 2015, between country and city. The Yes campaigners sought to turn those elections into a crude plebiscite, seeking more than 50% of the vote. They fell short, though with the Trump bonus of winning power without an overall majority of votes. But failure doesn’t dampen ardour like this.
Junqueras gave no further details but called on people to behave responsibly and to ignore the “provocations of those who want to stop the vote”.
Putin later in the day signed a decree that recognized Crimea's independence, the Kremlin said. He will address a joint session of Parliament on Crimea on Tuesday.
As NATO’s long involvement in Afghanistan concludes, the renewed emphasis on Russia and Europe is also likely to delay the alliance’s efforts to turn itself into a global actor, able to deal with threats like terrorism and cyberwarfare. Those goals were supposed to be the focus of the next NATO summit meeting in September, in Wales.
Meanwhile, the Catalan national assembly, a powerful pro-independence civil society group, has also said that it no longer makes sense “to keep the suspension of the independence declaration”.
