Local media reports have claimed as many as 14,000 Guardia Civil officers are sitting on cruise ships in Barcelona's harbor, awaiting deployment.
With 7.45 million people, the region accounts for 16% of Spain’s population. Its €215.6bn (£191bn) economy, larger than that of most countries in the eurozone, generates more than one-fifth of Spanish GDP, while Catalonia’s exports of €65.2bn represent more than one-quarter of the national total. At about €37bn, foreign investment in Catalonia accounts for more than one-quarter of inward investment to Spain.
After Vladimir Putin announced on Tuesday that Russia would absorb Crimea into its fold, attention now turns to the remaining Ukrainian military facilities on the peninsula.
Story highlights Catalan independence referendum has stoked fierce divisions across Spain
Raul Romeva, Catalonia's Minister of Foreign Affairs, condemned what he called "repressive measures," and said the Catalan government just wants to be able to negotiate with Madrid on an equal footing.
• The essence of the Catalans’ claim is the so-called “right to self-determination”, which is “the right of peoples to determine their own political status and to be free of alien domination, including formation of their own independent state”. Ironically, on 24 March 1999, a Spanish aircraft from the Nato alliance was among the first Nato planes to bomb Belgrade for denying the right to self-determination to the Albanian Kosovans. The action was also supported by the Catalans. But it came to haunt them both: the Spanish government for enthusiastically supporting the Kosovans’ claim, and the Catalans for naively believing that they would be rewarded for their staunch support.
Referendums are the blunt instrument of democracy, means that do not always will their expected end. Britain, surveying the inchoate aftermath of Brexit, is learning that the hard way. Catalonia may be about to learn it too.
Play Video 2:10 I am Catalan: 'It's about building a new society for all' – video
Panteleymonov heads the Ukrainian state television company, which runs the First Channel, accused of censorship and biased reporting under the rule of deposed president Viktor Yanukovych. The Svoboda MP and his associates were furious that the channel had transmitted footage from Putin's speech in the Kremlin on Tuesday in which the Russian president announced that Crimea would become part of the Russian Federation.
The foreign ministry claimed that the Europeans did not want to hear the real version of events on Crimea: "Why would he need to know the truth if everything has already been decided?"
