A clear sign that this was no ordinary construction project was that, in violation of the law, the builders never posted a building permit, not even a doctored one.
(CNN) The Catalan President has accused the Spanish government of imposing a "de facto state of emergency" after national police arrested several senior regional officials in an effort to halt a disputed independence referendum.
An outfit called Ukrkievresurs, a subsidiary of the company that ended up owning the land, set up the companies that managed Mr. Yanukovych’s residence outside Kiev, provided all of its furnishings and owned his helicopter and plane, according to corporate records uncovered by Ukrainian news media.
Read MoreThe dispute between the regional government in Barcelona and the national administration in Madrid has become increasingly bitter in recent weeks.
"The Spanish government has overstepped the red line that separated it from authoritarian and repressive regimes and has become a democratic embarrassment," Puigedemont said.
Puigdemont blasted the central government, saying "liberties are being suspended and repressed" and arguing that the raids hold "no legal basis." Catalan authorities insist they will defy Madrid and go ahead with the referendum on autonomy for the region on October 1.
Carles Puigdemont said Catalonia had been the "target of a coordinated aggression by the Spanish government's Interior Ministry", hours after police raided a number of Catalan regional government buildings.
Catalonia is led by a fragile coalition, and its government has struggled to maintain unity at times as it pursues a unilateral path toward independence. On Wednesday, Miquel Iceta, the leader of the Socialist Party of Catalonia, called on the regional government to abandon plans for the October referendum and stop fueling a secessionist conflict, “which will lead us all toward disaster.”Mr. Pilti, the shop owner, who used to hike in the area, said he quickly realized that the site involved more than just run-of-the-mill Ukrainian shenanigans, adding that he became “100 percent certain this was for Yanukovych, because only Yanukovych would dare build something like this.”
