South Korea has been gripped by this tragedy and the pronouncement of these fake social posts added to the collective anguish -- especially as social media has been playing a crucial role in relaying information from the site. 
Disgust, anger and shock greeted official statements from South Korean authorities that texts and social media posts from survivors trapped inside the stricken ferry had been faked.
The only reminder of what happened is a small, blackened, crater near the northern part of town, where a rocket laced with a nerve agent fell, killing more than 70 people in one of the worst mass casualty chemical attacks in the six-year war in Syria.
Iranians say Russia has often betrayed their country in their long history together. Use of the base is now decided case by case.
“Maybe the pilots heard the myth that you could come back to life 48 hours after dying from sarin, so they decided to bomb them again just in case,” said an official from the Ahrar al-Sham rebel group who was on the scene. “Thank God there is a Day of Judgment in the afterlife.”
"The only reason I made it out was because I was on the other side (of the room) in front of the TV," she says.
What would it take for Seoul to panic? Or for you even to think, “Ok, this is a more realistic threat”?
Not only have those groups used such weapons in Syria and Iraq before, the document said, but “they had a clear — and desperate — motive to use them, given that the tragedy in Khan Sheikhoun took place only days after the Trump administration publicly abandoned the U.S. policy of regime change in Syria.”
You live in Seoul, you wake up every day and deal with this. What’s the mood in Seoul like these days with these latest threats?
For a while on Friday night it looked as though one of the most powerful governments in the Middle East would be overthrown. Tanks brought Istanbul to a standstill as soldiers invaded the headquarters of the ruling party, bombed parliament, took over the military high command building, seized control of the state broadcaster and announced that the army was now in charge.
