The young passengers were among 325 second-year high school students on board the 6,825-ton ferry, which sank on April 16. After Su-hyeon, 17, was found dead, the police returned the boy’s recovered personal items to his family, who discovered the video on his phone. This week, his father, Park Jong-dae, released the video to the local news media, saying that South Koreans must watch it to learn what went wrong.
But despite the alarming angle that the ferry had already attained, there were few signs that a full-fledged evacuation was underway.
Judging from the volume of flowers sent to his funeral room -- from ROTC, his high school classmates, his previous schools where he taught -- it appeared the educator for over 20 years was a well-respected one. 
But Kim Soo Hyeon, chief of South Korea's Yellow Sea Maritime Police Agency, later said the ship apparently deviated from its planned route but did not appear to have hit a rock.
"She was so responsible and so kind," said her grandmother, Choi Sun Dok, 75, who sat on the floor, slumped against a wall, no longer able to stand. Her family members kneeled with her, holding her hand and weeping together on the floor. 
Every morning for a week the news has been dominated by the South Korean ferry tragedy. The terrible grief of the parents, the shocking response of the crew to the unfolding disaster, and the inexorably rising body count.
"We are so sorry..." tweeted Kim Min Hyuk, a senior at the high school, who tweeted the name of the vice principal along with the names of other dead teachers from the ferry tragedy. 
"Maybe they were waiting for a different rescue boat, but in that situation, you don't wait," says Moon. "They should have made the call for evacuation. So many lives would have been saved." 
In one example, the Italian steamer Sirio was wrecked off the Spanish coast in 1906, killing more than 150 people. 
The hearse carrying his coffin traveled a few miles east and pulled into Danwon High School, circling the campus for one last time -- signifying Kang's last visit to his school. 
