Einstein's concepts
Gravitational waves: 'we can hear the universe' – live Read more
Stars are like balls flying around in the universe and when they get very old they turn black, and they become black holes. But even if they’re old they might still like to play the spinning game – and, like you and your friend, they might also crash into each other. If they do crash into each other, it’s like you and your friend jumping into the lake. It makes a huge splash and then ripples spread out all across the lake, right to the edge.
If you didn’t fully grasp Thursday’s blockbuster announcement that scientists had detected gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric of spacetime that were first anticipated by Albert Einstein a century ago, you were not alone.
Gravitational waves were predicted by Einstein in his general theory of relativity in 1915, the theory that proposed space-time as a concept. The waves are a distortion of space-time.
"What's really exciting is what comes next," said Reitze at the announcement. "I think we're opening a window on the universe -- a window of gravitational wave astronomy."
Physicists have announced the discovery of gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric of spacetime that were first anticipated by Albert Einstein a century ago.
The scientists detected their cataclysmic event using an instrument so sensitive it could detect a change in the distance between the solar system and the nearest star four light years away to the thickness of a human hair.
When you drop your toy dog and it falls to the floor, that’s gravity pulling it down, the gravity of the Earth. You can’t see it, you can’t feel it, but it’s there. In the universe far away, black holes have a lot more gravity than the Earth’s. The gravity is so strong that even light, like from your flashlight, falls in it and can’t get out. And these black holes move around a lot in space. When they crash into each other, they send out huge waves that tell the universe what just happened.
However, in order for us to detect them, they needed to be created by a mammoth event -- for example, the collision of two black holes.
