
Daylight brings clearer pictures of the coup's chaos.
That is a blow, not only to the country, but also to NATO, of which Turkey is a member. The Turkish military is a crucial ally in fighting terrorism, reining in the Islamic State, and in controlling the migrant tide that has overwhelmed Europe. Chaos within the military symbolizes not only its waning power in the country — and the rise of the police, which Mr. Erdogan built up as a bulwark to the military — but also its diminished reliability as a partner to the West.
They also have their own awful folk memories of Russian colonisation and exile: in 1944, Stalin deported the Tartars and other smaller groups to central Asia. They mostly came home after the collapse of the Soviet Union. Understandably, they may now fear being cast once again in the role of fifth columnists. So far the Kremlin has said nothing about their rights.
‘The government is calling on its own people to kill its soldiers. I don’t know how we got here’
This may seem like a bizarre provincial venue. But there is method here too: Russia refuses to recognise Kiev's new pro-western interim government as a legitimate partner. It is likely to continue to treat Yanukovych – whose regime is accused of plundering $70bn (£42bn) from Ukraine's treasury – as the head of a government-in-exile. It may even seek to return him to Crimea to continue his "executive" functions. Given Yanukovych's love of bling, Crimea's sumptuous Livadia Palace – where Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill met to discuss Europe's 1945 postwar carve-up – might serve as his new HQ.
7:30 p.m.: Erdogan speaks to another cheering, flag-waving crowd, blaming the coup attempt on rival Fethullah Gulen, a cleric and former ally who lives in exile in Pennsylvania.
Gunfire rings out as a confused nation watches.
In our fifth-floor flat we tried to follow events on social media. By the time the noises became more dramatic Kaan was thankfully asleep. The most frightening aspect was the sonic booms coming from jets going up and down the Bosphorus. We could also hear gunfire.
“We knew that the Fethullah Gulen organization was trying to access the military,” he said. “Although we tried to convince people that the Gulenists were causing trouble in state institutions, we weren’t able to convince anyone.”
