JUST WATCHED What Trump has said about North Korea Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH What Trump has said about North Korea 02:05
It's unlikely that Clinton intended to gain politically from these remarks -- and they were carefully qualified. She added that "there is no indication that Putin is as irrational" as the German dictator was. But they could indicate that if she wins the 2016 election, America might gain a slightly more forceful president in foreign affairs, someone more willing to engage directly in Europe than Obama has. You may recall that in the 2008 primaries she was the Democrats' hawk candidate -- so much so that Ann Coulter preferred her to John McCain (Coulter called her "our girl").
The takeaway: There are plenty of other possibilities, but conventional wisdom says these are the most likely options at the moment.  The biggest danger?  Everyone is wrong ... and some unforeseen, uncontrolled options arise, making the situation not better, but even worse.  
The North has closed off the entrance to the tunnel at the Punggye-ri nuclear test site, the official said.
Zhao said, in an effort to deter North Korea, Japan could provoke an arms race in East Asia with South Korea, China and even Russia.
The parents of the dead and missing, meanwhile, cling to photos and videos of their lost loved ones.
In other words, in this situation, who exactly are the Nazis? Putin's ethnic Russian nationalists? Or the fringe of the ethnic Ukrainian nationalists? Neither is particularly pleasant.
Leaked call raises questions about who was behind sniper attacks in Ukraine
He said last week at a State Department briefing that the recent lack of missile tests may have been "the signal we are looking for."
There are some known facts: First, far-right, anti-Semitic, anti-Russian and openly fascist groups have existed and do exist as a blight on modern Ukraine. A 2012 European Parliament resolution condemned the main -- but by no means most extreme -- ultra-right party, Svoboda, as "racist, anti-Semitic and xenophobic."  
