Major Jamil al-Saleh, a US-backed rebel commander whose Hama district in the country’s centre was struck by the suspected chemical weapons attack, told the Associated Press he hoped the US attack would be a “turning point” in the war that has left more than 400,000 dead.
In reprisal for the Bashar al-Assad regime’s alleged use of chemical weapons earlier this week, the US launched 59 long-range Tomahawk missiles on the airbase from which it believes the Syrian warplanes launched the chemical attack.
When the uprising represents only a faction of officers, Mr. Klaas said, the confidence game can also require quickly seizing top leaders and persuading or forcing a senior officer to publicly declare the coup’s victory, creating an appearance of success before anyone figures out what happened.
If a [US] action will really be put forward, we are ready to do our part,” the Daily Hurriyet newspaper quoted Erdoğan as saying, citing an interview with Turkey’s Kanal 7 broadcaster.
"Assad has an air force, and that air force is the cause of most of these civilian deaths as we have seen over the years and as we saw again in the last few days," Clinton said in a speech at the "Women in the World" summit in New York City. "And I really believe that we should have and still should take out his air fields and prevent him from being able to use them to bomb innocent people and drop sarin gas on them."
Corbyn’s call to “urge restraint on the Trump administration” was backed up by the shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry, but contradicted by the party’s deputy leader.
The president’s army is battle-weary, but the sarin attack and the US missile strikes show this war is far from over

Tom Watson told the Birmingham Mail earlier in the day that he believed it was a “direct and proportionate response to a clear violation of international law by the Syrian regime”. The MP said the attack using a nerve agent showed Assad retained chemical weapons capability.
On Friday morning the French government said “Assad bears full responsibility” for the airstrikes. Francois Hollande, the French president, had already spoken to his German counterpart, chancellor Angela Merkel, about the attack, a statement said.
