The IMF urged policymakers in the UK and rest of the EU to end the uncertainty. “Of primary importance is a smooth and predictable transition to a new set of post-exit trading and financial relationships that as much as possible preserves gains from trade between the UK and the EU.”
A slowdown puts even more pressure on the banks, because people and businesses are more likely to default on their debt. Italian banks are already being crushed by problem loans worth €360 billion ($396 billion).
Photo
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, the Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Ken Clarke says I'm a bloody difficult woman Theresa May
The fifth uncertainty is the EU’s negotiating stance, starting with who will lead the talks, the European commission or the council of ministers. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, has made it clear that she will not give the commission carte blanche to negotiate on Germany’s behalf. Beyond this question lies another: whether Europe will agree on its final negotiating stance before the French presidential election next spring and Germany’s general election in autumn 2017.
Remain secured 48% of the vote -- not enough to secure victory.
Despite this, Scotland could decide to use sterling unofficially, Broun says. Also unclear is what would happen to Scotland's share of UK debt if it's not part of a currency union, he adds.
The Scottish government says it would manage the energy industry better, invest to boost production, and create a wealth fund, similar to Norway's oil fund, to benefit future generations.
