In the summer of 2014, Bannon explained the attraction of the Russian leader for “traditionalists”, to a meeting of conservative Catholics through a Skype link to the Vatican.
NATO's top commander has voiced worries that Russian troops could roll into Moldova's separatist region Transnistria, on the opposite side of Ukraine, and Russia fought a brief war with the former Soviet republic of Georgia about five years ago.
The crisis in Ukraine has already had consequences for taxpayers. This month, Austrian regulators blocked plans by Raiffeisen to repay its state aid because the bank might need the money to cope with losses from the region.
The Kremlin said a new blockade would “significantly complicate the living conditions for the region’s residents, impeding their movement and normal trade and economic activities,” and it urged negotiations to address the situation.
The 61-year-old actor and martial artist, who is currently filming an action movie in Romania, also said that media coverage of US opposition to Putin's actions was designed to promote the agenda of President Barack Obama. Seagal, who has appeared on the state-owned TV station Russia Today as an expert commentator on the standoff in Ukraine, was in turn tipped for a future political career in the US by Rossiskaya Gazeta. The newspaper bizarrely described him as on a par in terms of fame and authority with two former Hollywood heroes turned political titans, Ronald Reagan and Arnold Schwarzenegger.
A spokesman for Raiffeisen declined to comment ahead of the release on Thursday of fourth-quarter financial results. The bank, whose shares have fallen 29 percent since Jan. 23, has scheduled a news conference in Vienna on Thursday at which Karl Sevelda, the chief executive, is likely to face intense questioning about Russia and Ukraine.
If NBA team owners gather to discuss the transfer they have to consider the best interest of the league and owners, as well the ramifications of ownership change, he said. 
Tensions between Moscow and Kiev have escalated since Russia reclaimed the Crimea region after a referendum this month that overwhelmingly supported the annexation. The United States and its allies have pledged to isolate Russia for its actions.
He suggested Ukrainian ultra-nationalists had been threatening ethnic Russians and driving them out of their homes and businesses -- the same accusations that Moscow used as a pretext to intervene in Crimea. 
But if the Russians roll into eastern Ukraine, it will be very different from the house-to-house urban combat that has previously taken place in the Chechen capital of Grozny.  
