A clear sign that this was no ordinary construction project was that, in violation of the law, the builders never posted a building permit, not even a doctored one.
I mean, in their eyes with the amount of propaganda from billboards with swastikas over the map of Ukraine and rumors of terrorists in Kiev, who wouldn't want to be Russian? In their eyes, it's either that or being a Nazi.
“We in the House and the Senate are usually quite favorably disposed to the types of crippling economic sanctions which would really implode an economy, really have an effect. The administration is usually pushing back on sanctions,” Royce said.
One option for defusing the crisis, mentioned by U.S. Vice President Joe Biden, would be the deployment of international monitors in the Crimea to provide the protection to Russian citizens that Moscow says its troops are providing. 
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Ukrainian soldiers look out through a gate from behind a Ukrainian flag as they wait inside the Sevastopol tactical military brigade base near Belbek in Sevastopol on 3 March. Photograph: Filippo Monteforte/AFP/Getty Images

“That is our how our country was started,” he said. “It was the right of self-determination, and voting, and asking and even fighting for it, and seceding. Of course libertarians were delighted with the secession of the various countries and units of government away from the Soviet Union, so yes, we want the people to make the decisions.”
Martin, responding on Twitter to coverage of her remarks and messages of support, said: "I am not going to Crimea despite the statement RT has made."Russia is banning the Canadian officials -- including several aides to Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper -- from entering the country, according to RIA-Novosti.
Former world champion heavyweight boxer Vitali Klitschko has been the most well-known opposition figure during the crisis. He heads the Ukrainian Democratic Alliance for Reforms party. There's also Arseniy Yatsenyuk, a former foreign minister.
