By occupying Crimea, Russia wants to ensure that only a rump Ukraine could negotiate with the EU in the future.
Ukraine Interior Minister Arsen Avakov earlier characterized the presence at the airport of unidentified armed men, who wore uniforms without insignia, as an "armed invasion."
After she saw Yanukovych’s actions, his house, the intervention in Russia, she started to filter the information and became much more careful and sceptical, though she still tends to trust propaganda. But I am working on it! I think the attitudes of many have been shaken. People are less apathetic now. People know that the future depends on every single citizen.
In what appeared to be an illustration of the growing schism between the two world powers, U.S. President Barack Obama and Putin spoke for 90 minutes -- with each expressing their concern over the mounting crisis, according to separate statements released by their respective governments. 
"Nobody will give Crimea away," he said. "There are no grounds for the use of force against civilians and Ukrainians, and for the entry of the Russian military contingent," 
That after 14 years the leader of an increasingly authoritarian state should start to make mistakes is not surprising. Such leaders tend to become trapped in an information bubble of their own creation. 
But the president did not suggest the Congress should have any role in devising sanctions against Russia. One Democratic congressional source working on Ukraine legislation said the administration’s “strong preference” was sanctions introduced through executive authority.
Asked by CNN's Christiane Amanpour if she was calling for the West to use military force against Russia, Tymoshenko avoided giving a direct answer, saying she "cannot solve this issue." 
By granting asylum to NSA leaker Edward Snowden, the Russian president could claim -- implausibly -- to be on the side of citizen privacy and transparency. Despite a chorus of gloom in the Western press, the Sochi Winter Olympics had passed without terrorist attacks or other disasters and with Russian athletes dominating the medals count. 
What’s the atmosphere like in Independence Square, Kiev and the rest of the country?
