The European Union confirmed details of the sanctions against 12 Russian officials agreed to late Thursday at the EU Heads of State or Government summit.
Russia's compatriot policies are officially meant to protect ethnic Russians living in nearby countries, but have served Russia's territorial expansionism in the past.
"There are reasons for why the situation in Ukraine is what it is today," Qin said.
"Twenty-five years after the end of the conflict between the blocs, there's a new, real danger that Europe will split once again," Steinmeier said, according to Spiegel.
As Ukraine's stability continues to unravel, Sinichkin and his pro-Russian Night Wolves, a squad of tattooed men who sit astride powerful Harley-Davidsons, have become apparent outriders for what could be a full-scale Russian military advance on the Crimean peninsula.
During the Euromaidan protests, of which she was a vocal part, Chernovil's car was rammed off the road and she was badly beaten by her assailants. At the time police claimed the attack had been motivated by "road rage" but Chernovil dismissed the claim as "ridiculous" and said the assault was clearly linked to her work. Her precise role in government remains unclear.In Sevastopol, residents told CNN they were angry that President Viktor Yanukovych has been forced out and fear that they will be oppressed by the country's new leaders.
"Sanctions are not a question of retaliation; they are a foreign policy tool," Van Rompuy said. "Our goal is to stop Russian action against Ukraine, to restore Ukraine's sovereignty, and to achieve this, we need a negotiated solution."
He also urged the Crimean people to remain calm and not be provoked, the statement said.
The Syrian government, not unlike President Obama’s critics in Washington, sees the recent events as part of a decline in America’s influence and a rise in Russia’s. By meddling in the affairs of other countries, from Iraq to the former Soviet countries, said one prominent businessman and political observer in Syria, the United States provoked the world and squandered its position as the sole global power after the Soviet Union’s collapse.
