But if financial contagion doesn’t appear to be a grave threat, political contagion does.
Women hold a demonstration calling for peace in Bakhchisarai. Photograph: Spencer Platt/Getty Images
What nobody remarked on was the absurdity of Gove calling the EU a job destroyer, when far heavier destruction was inflicted by British government policy during those years. When Mrs Thatcher came to office in 1979, manufacturing accounted for almost 30% of Britain’s national income and employed 6.8 million people; by 2010, it accounted for 11% and employed 2.5 million. And, unlike Mr Gove, a welder who was thrown out of work by a closing Sunderland shipyard had no business to sell.
“The market has certainly been quite sanguine in its assessment of the situation, noting that, technically, nothing has really changed in the UK’s relationship with the EU, and that even negotiations about negotiations have yet to start.”
“His charming, bumbling buffoon image was neatly done and went down very well with audiences,” said Ian Hislop, editor of Private Eye magazine and a panelist on the show.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Actually winning the presidency remains a more remote prospect. But the issues raised by the British vote — sovereignty, national identity, immigration and a popular backlash against what is perceived as an out-of-touch elite — provide Ms. Le Pen with a powerful platform.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest The Sun’s 6am edition. Photograph: Twitter
"It's written in all the textbooks that during a time of military action, the first three or four days are the hardest, and after that you adapt," said Vladimir Dokuchayev, deputy commander of the base. "That is more or less what has happened. We are getting used to the situation."
Sandel refers to a failure common to the western world. But when did the elites begin to fail Britain in particular? An economic historian might point to a period in the late 19th century when Germany overtook Britain in chemical research and technical education and, together with America, began to replace it as the world’s supreme industrial nation. But that was an unconscious failure; active betrayal has come within living memory. As a journalist working in the 1960s and 1970s, I grew used to the story of the factory closure, but only in the 1980s did these apparently random events accumulate to become known by a word, deindustrialisation, that implied a process governments either couldn’t stop, chose not to stop, or took steps to encourage.
