For some of the protesters at least, idealism and anger trumped practical concerns.
Whitehall officials also made it clear they would re-evaluate their policy if they were asked to approve future export licences for teargas to Hong Kong.
So valuable are they to the protesters – not only against pepper spray but the blazing midday sun – that by Monday morning, Associated Press was reporting that supporters had donated hundreds of replacements, which were being handed out to demonstrators who needed them at special distribution stations on the fringes of the protest zone.
Kiev mobilized troops and called up military reservists. Russian generals led their troops to three bases in the region and demanded Ukrainian forces surrender and hand over their weapons, Vladislav Seleznyov, spokesman for the Crimean Media Center of the Ukrainian Defense Ministry, told CNN.
That mood continued amid crowds of civilians who were there to voice their opinions about the chaos that has enveloped Ukraine in recent months, starting with street protests that were sparked by President Viktor Yanukovych's rejection of a trade deal with the European Union. Yanukovych was ousted February 22.  
The previous week had seen days of action, as university and high school students came out in droves to rally against what they believe is the Chinese central government's reneging on key promises for Hong Kong's political future. 
First, Ukraine is not a distant empire but an integral part of Europe. Its capital, Kiev, is just a short flight from cities Americans visit all the time: Rome, Frankfurt, Paris.
Democratic groups say Beijing has chipped away at those freedoms, citing a proposed election law that would limit voting reforms.
So what are Russia's interests? Why would it risk so much for a seemingly tiny corner of Ukraine. The answer lies with one of those distant-sounding places mentioned at the start of the piece: Sevastopol.
At the base Sunday, pro-Russian protesters chanted on one side of the street, while pro-Ukrainian protesters, including a priest and a man who read aloud from the Bible, rallied on the other. A group of women sang in support with Ukraine. Those who supported Russian intervention marched carrying Russian flags. They sang "Crimea is part of Russia" and recited verses that suggested former Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev gave Crimea away, from Russia to Ukraine, in the 1950s without the consent of the people. There was a brief shouting match between the protesters but the peace was maintained. 
