Puigdemont has said Catalonia earned the right to become an independent republic in its October 1 referendum, which was held despite being banned by Spain's Constitutional Court. Violent scenes unfolded as national police sought to prevent people from casting their ballots.
"If anyone in the Russian leadership thought the world wouldn't care about their actions in Ukraine or that they could drive a wedge between the European Union and the United States, they clearly miscalculated," Obama said. 
In its statement posted on its official website, the Kremlin said Mr. Putin “drew Barack Obama’s attention to continued rampage of extremists who are committing acts of intimidation towards peaceful residents, government authorities and law enforcement agencies in various regions and in Kiev with impunity.”
He also brushed aside a question on suspected Russian hacking of Macron’s campaign, saying it was just media speculation and therefore not for politicians to comment on. Putin defended meeting Le Pen and said it absolutely did not mean that Moscow had sought to influence the election result.
The property is still officially owned by Artek, whose new chief executive, Igor Leli, was appointed a month ago after a purge of officials still loyal to Kiev. But Artek's spokesperson told the Guardian that "a sale to a private individual is possible and more information will be publicly available soon".
“We keep a close eye on potential indirect effects, as they might have a more substantial impact than direct exposures to these countries,” said Andreas Dombret, a member of the executive board of the Bundesbank, the German central bank.
Macron said he favoured a democratic transition in Syria that would “preserve the Syrian state”. He said: “Failed states in the region are a threat to our democracies, and we have seen each time they have enabled terrorist groups to advance.”
Mr. Rajoy said that his goal was to arrange new Catalan elections within six months, so as to lift the measures taken under Article 155 as soon as possible.
They say they have no real weapons, but this band of brothers has made up a stash of Molotov cocktails, with rags stuffed into old vodka bottles. The few yards of trenches that stretch into a nearby tree line are only a fallback position, and hardly constitute a sturdy defensive line. 
“It made sense to expand into Eastern Europe,” said Eleni Papoula, an analyst at Berenberg Bank. “But the strategy did not work out the way they expected.”
