.@heliheartland wearing the pin signals my intentions to intervene and report - I can only hope others will do the same. #safetypin — miss pommery 1926 (@cheeahs) June 28, 2016
"I think those people really lack a sense of empathy for what it must be like to walk into a room or step on a train -- full of strangers -- and you just have to hope that none of them are going to come after you," she says. "I completely agree. It is patronizing if you just wear the pin and think you've done your job."
It is not clear how many of those 331 attacks are linked to the referendum, but there have been several high-profile cases tied to the vote for Brexit, the combination of words for Britain and exit that refers to the United Kingdom leaving the European Union.
"From the beginning, I've always said if you're going to wear the safety pin, you've got to back it up. So if you put it on, you are pledging to support people and to intervene and report if you see incidences of racial or xenophobic abuse."
2 young men in Streatham yelling at a Polish man & his mother 'this is an island & you people need to leave it' @PostRefRacism — Helen (@DT_Helen) June 28, 2016
"I was walking in my local high street, talking to a friend of mine -- we were speaking English -- and a chap just behind me shouted 'I like your accent' in a very loud voice -- I did feel it was a bit threatening.
The idea was sparked by Twitter user Allison ( @cheeahs ), who wanted a simple way of showing those worried about possible attacks "my intentions to intervene and report" on their behalf.
But Allison also has a few choice words for commentators who think the campaign is pointless.
Ready to be your #SafetyPin on the bus,in streets,wherever you are,my fellow foreign-born friends ❤️#LoveOverFear pic.twitter.com/4wqzMCHs2N — Dancing Psychiatrist (@Lollindialogue) June 29, 2016
I am the son of immigrant parents. I will not tolerate discrimination of any kind. We are stronger together. #SafetyPin A photo posted by Dr Ranj (@drranj) on Jun 30, 2016 at 1:07am PDT
