On Monday, Vice President Joe Biden called Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev to urge Russia to "pull back its forces, support the immediate deployment of international monitors to Ukraine, and begin a meaningful political dialogue with the Ukrainian government," the White House said.
Russia's military occupation of Ukrainian territory on the Crimean peninsula constitutes a blatant violation of the commitments that Moscow undertook in the 1994 Budapest Memorandum on Security Assurances for Ukraine. The United States and United Kingdom, the other two signatories, now have an obligation to support Ukraine and penalize Russia.
The base's aviation brigade then sang the Ukrainian national anthem, lowered the Ukrainian flag and left the base, he said.
The Crimean Tatars have been well organised since the 1960s. They have their own would-be parliament, the Qurultay, which revamped its voting system last year after an internal debate on accountability, introducing some proportional representation.
As Washington pundits watch the carnage in Kiev, images of a rapacious Russian President Vladimir Putin, puppet master of Ukraine and of its president, Viktor Yanukovych, stalk the headlines. Putin, the theory goes, is willing to stoke a civil war in order to keep Ukraine from turning to the West.
On Friday, the intense negotiations resulted in a breakthrough deal to reduce the president's powers and roll back parts of the Constitution, which gave them to him.
NATO has already stepped up air policing over the Baltic states -- all members of the Alliance.
Those words will have echoed across parts of the former Soviet Union with large Russian populations: Moldova (10%), Lithuania (6%), Latvia (27%) and Estonia (25%). Will the Russian region of Transnistria in Moldova begin agitating for its own referendum? Will oblasts (regions) of eastern Ukraine demand their own vote?
Transnistria is already beyond the control of the Moldovan government. Just as a statue of Lenin overlooks the main square in the Crimean capital, Simferopol, so another stands outside Transnistria's regional assembly in Tiraspol. In a 2006 referendum more than 95% of voters said they wanted to be reunited with Russia. 
"The Spanish government has overstepped the red line that separated it from authoritarian and repressive regimes and has become a democratic embarrassment," Puigedemont said.
