This situation bears all the hallmarks of several long-standing, often referred to as "frozen", conflicts in Eastern Europe. In Transnistria, a breakaway region of Moldova, in Nagorno-Karabakh, which is contested by Armenia and Azerbaijan, or in Abkhazia and South-Ossetia, which have seceded from Georgia, Russia has long propped up separatists, providing political backing, military support, funding and passports. This undermines the stability of its smaller neighbors, challenges those nations' sovereignty, blocks domestic reforms, and impedes European integration.
“Everybody was highlighting numbers and statistics, but nobody really explained who these people are,” he told the Observer. Some are personal friends, others celebrated within the profession and several are nationally famous.
Pictures of detainees flooded social media showing them in their underwear and corralled in stables. Human rights groups condemned the treatment of the prisoners.
Videos and photos posted on social media show crowds marching through the streets -- some marchers facing off against tanks and armored vehicles.
By underwriting Crimean separatism, Russia is taking the first steps toward repeating such a scenario in Ukraine. So while many in Kiev and in Western capitals are pondering what Russia will do next, the the Kremlin has already made its decision. 
“If they have guns and tanks, we have faith,” said Mr. Erdogan, who also attended a funeral of a friend who was killed, and was seen crying. “We are not after revenge. So let us think before taking each step. We will act with reason and experience.”
We asked people living in Turkey how they have been affected by the military coup attempt. Here they share their experiences
A commander arrived and the soldier told him we had concerns and asked him what was wrong. Apparently he had no idea too. The commander was very nervous. He started screaming at the poor soldier for sharing information and called him stupid. Seeing the commander so angry we ran back inside.

Turkish state broadcaster TRT says it has been taken over by members of the military who were part of the coup attempt.
