In a dramatic announcement two days before the final vote, Macron’s team said thousands of its campaign emails had been released in a major hacking operation. Cybersecurity analysts suggested the operation might have been undertaken by Russia-affiliated groups. Moscow and Russian news outlets had rejected any allegations of interference.
Farage strongly opposed any British military involvement in Syria at the time of the parliamentary vote last summer.
And even if this can be overcome, in the end Poland and Ukraine, rather than finding mutual love for each other, might well start a war over historical memory, for which neither lacks pretexts. We have seen the history books reopened on Crimea; there is no reason they cannot be reopened on Polish-Ukrainian tensions as well.
The Kremlin said a new blockade would “significantly complicate the living conditions for the region’s residents, impeding their movement and normal trade and economic activities,” and it urged negotiations to address the situation.
Crimea belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine, which was then part of the Soviet Union. The region has a majority ethnic Russian population and other historic ties to Russia.
In contrast, federalists, centered in the employment rolls of the expansive European institutions, dream of a United States of Europe and fantasize about returning to the 1990s, before the euro, before eastward expansion, when the European Union was smaller, smarter, more prosperous and decidedly Western — and hardly anyone challenged the vision of an “ever closer Union.”
Mr. Putin’s willingness to negotiate suggested some confidence that he will be dealing with the West from a position of strength, having consolidated his grip on Crimea and largely dispersed the remaining Ukrainian military units that had been holed up awaiting instructions from Kiev. The Ukrainian government this week formally ordered a withdrawal.
Russia set out a series of tough conditions on Sunday night for agreeing a diplomatic solution to the crisis over its annexation of Crimea, demanding that the US and its European partners accept its proposal that ethnic Russian regions of eastern and southern Ukraine be given extensive autonomous powers independent of Kiev.
"I prefer to say that we are not pointing our tanks at the Russians but merely looking toward our brothers in case they advance in friendship," he said. The major said he could scarcely believe he was on high alert to battle troops from Moscow. 
"This would complete the historical justice. Crimea returned to Russia and Putin returning to Russia's soul," said Mikhail, an ethnic Russian who owns a holiday apartment in one of the nearby blocks. "When Khrushchev gave away Crimea it was a terrible moment for all the Russians here, we have waited more than 60 years for this moment. It would be an honour to welcome the Russian president in Yalta."
