Ideally, seek independence from a ruler who is unelected and friendless. And hire lobbyists to persuade world leaders that your bid will promote their interests and values, presenting it as an easy choice.The Spanish Data Protection Agency said in a statement that people working in polling stations could be fined up to 300,000 euros ($354,000) for doing so.
Barcelona, Spain (CNN) Large crowds turned out Saturday in Barcelona to call for dialogue to resolve rising tensions surrounding last weekend's banned Catalan independence referendum.
Spain's central government insists the referendum is illegal, must not go ahead and that the result will not be recognized. It has drafted in thousands of extra police to try to prevent the vote taking place.
"Russia has offered a variety of arguments to justify what is nothing more than a land grab," he said. Biden revealed that the US was considering deploying ground troops to the Baltic states on new military exercises as it seeks to reassure Nato allies in eastern Europe of its commitment to preventing further territorial aggression by Russia.After Vladimir Putin announced on Tuesday that Russia would absorb Crimea into its fold, attention now turns to the remaining Ukrainian military facilities on the peninsula.
That is what happened in March to Artur Mas, Catalonia’s former leader, who was fined and barred from holding office for two years after a court found him guilty of organizing the last independence referendum.
Politician Vitali Klitschko, who plans to stand in the presidential elections in May, said it was important the MPs were punished, calling their acts "savagery and lawlessness". He added: "Ukrainians changed the power in the country because of lawlessness and lack of justice. This should not remain unpunished. All Svoboda MPs who resorted to force should vacate their seats."
Richmond upon Thames, Surrey
Additional state police have been deployed to the region in the days leading up to the ballot to maintain order and prevent the vote taking place, Reuters reported, citing the Spanish Interior Ministry.
