JUST WATCHED David Cameron announces impending resignation Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH David Cameron announces impending resignation 00:50
Speaking at the final round of Voom, a competition for young entrepreneurs hoping to secure funding and support from Virgin, Branson warned that the business climate after the Brexit vote was already hurting the economy.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, the Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Bailed out bank’s boss says referendum result pushes back government’s prospect of selling off its stake by a couple of years
“However even without the buildup to the vote and subsequent decision in favour of Brexit, it is likely that the housing numbers would have slowed during the second quarter of the year, following the rush in many parts of the country from buy-to-let investors to secure purchases ahead of the tax changes.”
Speaking in Birmingham, England, Ms. May also called for efforts to increase productivity, for employees and consumers to gain seats on company boards and for votes on executive pay to become binding rather than advisory. Big multinationals should pay their share of taxes, she said, adding: “Whether you’re Amazon, Google or Starbucks, you have a duty to put something back, you have a debt to your fellow citizens, you have a responsibility to pay your taxes.”“I want to send you a message of calmness and respect; of the will for political dialogue and agreement,” he said.
Hours before the announcement, Donald Tusk, the president of the European council, appealed to Puigdemont to step back from a unilateral declaration of independence and begin dialogue with the Spanish prime minister, Mariano Rajoy.
“Let us address concerns head on,” Sturgeon said. “And above all, let us inspire confidence in our fellow citizens that the way things are now is not the way they must always be. There is a better future to be had for all of us, if we chose to build it, together.”
As the chancellor, George Osborne, prepared to meet with the heads of the major banks to discuss the impact of the EU referendum result on Tuesday, Ross McEwan said the prospects of selling off the majority of the stake had been pushed back by a couple of years.
