Josep Lluís Cleries, a Catalan Senator, told reporters on Saturday that Mr. Rajoy was suspending not autonomy in Catalonia but democracy.
"Yes, I am planning to run," she said at a news conference at her Kiev office.
Jan Techau, director of the Carnegie Europe thinktank, told the Guardian: "It is an extremely cynical argument by Mr Farage. You can blame the EU rightly for not having calculated correctly the strategic considerations of Mr Yanukovich and Mr Putin. We were all a bit naive there. But this does not amount to a whipping-up of the population so that they would then run into a trap. This is not about abandoning them.
"Mikhail was not in any way tying it to the current political situation," Ellen Pinchuk, director for international projects at the communications adviser group Mikhailov & Partners, said this week.
"The ones that have caused the bloodshed were the Russians. What enrages me about [Farage's remarks] is that it actually turns the victims into culprits. That is a very cynical argument. It completely disqualifies him from any kind of foreign policy judgment."Russian forces are currently positioned in and around Rostov, Kursk and Belgorod, according to U.S. intelligence information. The estimated 30,000 troops are "significantly more" than what is needed for the military exercises Russia says it has been conducting, and there is no sign the troops are making any move to return to their home bases.
Speaking to the state-run newspaper Rossiskaya Gazeta, in comments first noted by the Moscow Times, Seagal described western policy on Ukraine as "idiotic". He said Putin's desire "to protect the Russian-speaking people of Crimea, his assets, and the Russian Black Sea military base in Sevastopol … [was] very reasonable".
For his part, Putin warned that sanctions against Russia over Ukraine would “in no way” resolve the crisis. Both leaders agreed the time was right for a new round of peace talks on Ukraine.
“Russian civil society is still very vulnerable,” Ms. Prokhorova said. “There are not enough institutions to support it, to defend it from the state.”
One or two outspoken critics, including Andrei Zubov, a history professor at the Moscow State Institute of International Relations, were fired after speaking out against Russia’s Ukraine policy.
