He said the U.S. security pact with Japan does extend to the islands -- known as Diaoyu to the Chinese -- and insisted his implicit offer to defend them against any Chinese incursion did not amount to drawing a red line around the contested land.
Buses in Seoul install 'comfort women' statues to honour former sex slaves Read more
CNN and other international media interviewed victims of the attack who described how many of their relatives were killed. One man told how 25 members of his family had died , including his two young twins. He was pictured cradling their dead bodies.
The Ukrainian government has been carrying out its side of that agreement, he said. It has, for example, offered amnesty to those who will lay down their arms.
The agreement also calls for both sides to refrain from violence. On Thursday, the Ukrainian government said its forces killed five pro-Russian activists while destroying opposition roadblocks. 
These days the 28-year-old, whose grandfather fled to Japan at the outbreak of the Korean war in 1950, prefers to use the Korean reading of her first name rather than Yuko – the name her parents gave her.
"The treaty between the U.S. and Japan preceded my birth, so this isn't a red line that I'm drawing," Obama said. "There's no shift in position, no red line. Were simply applying the treaty."
Mr. Assad, who has been widely denounced for documented atrocities committed by his military during the civil war, said of the reports about the Khan Sheikhoun attack, “Definitely, 100 percent for us, it’s fabrication.”
François Delattre, the French ambassador, also called for new sanctions. “It is no longer a regional threat, it is a global threat,” he said. “It is no longer a virtual threat, it is an imminent threat. It is no longer a serious threat, it is an existential threat.”
“We believe it is highly likely that the attack was carried out by the Assad regime,” she said. “Apart from anything else, we believe it’s only the regime that has the capability to make such an attack.”
