Instead, Mr. Bond said, he would prefer to see active military exercises, and soon. He said that the United States Army in Europe was scheduled to have an exercise in July in Ukraine, “and it might be worth moving that up.”
Aleksei V. Malashenko, an analyst at the Carnegie Moscow Center, said Russian officials “will be shocked” with the challenges they face when trying to manage Crimea — reviving its economy, distributing money and influence among its ethnic groups, and trying to control the corruption that accompanies all big Russian projects. And, judging from precedent, the public’s euphoria will fade, he said.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
The ethnic Tatars and younger voters have also questioned the legality of secession. Many of the Tatar minority boycotted the referendum with some leaders calling it "a farce" forced by armed men.
Mr. Borrell, however, is among those who have forcefully challenged separatist claims that an independent Catalonia would have a bright economic future.
Mr. Putin, the country’s paramount leader for more than 14 years, appeared to be gambling that the outrage would eventually pass, as it did after Russia’s war with Georgia in 2008, because a newly assertive Russia would be simply too important to ignore on the world stage. As with any gamble, though, the annexation of Crimea carries potentially grave risks.
Colau has accused the Catalan government of “ignoring half the Catalan population”. The day after the national day march , La Vanguardia, the voice of mainstream nationalism and the business community, published an editorial that read: “An assault on the constitution is not the way forward, even though it appeals to hundreds of thousands of people … Half of Catalonia doesn’t support the separatist cause … and many people have yet to recover from the stupor of seeing the methods parliament used last week to pass the so-called disconnection laws.”
"We'll continue to make clear to Russia that further provocations will achieve nothing except to further isolate Russia and diminish its place in the world," President Barack Obama said on Monday.
Hard-line and far-left separatists want a decisive and rapid break from Mr. Rajoy’s national government, following the highly controversial Catalan referendum on Oct. 1 that had been suspended by Spain’s constitutional court.

