1.  What action did Russian President Vladimir Putin take yesterday regarding Crimea?  How have the United States and the European Union responded to this action?
Ex-President Carles Puigdemont was granted conditional release by the judge, Puigdemont's lawyer, Paul Bekaert, confirmed. Puigdemont, along with the four former Catalan parliamentarians who had also surrendered, are due in court in the Belgian capital within 15 days.
Yet for all that the Belgian government has sought to depoliticise the issue, and insist that it is a matter for the independent judiciary, Puigdemont’s arrival has already stirred up domestic political tensions.
"We weren't allowed to speak Catalan in school. I had to teach it to my children again after Franco died," she said. "Naturally, I was very angry."
“You are blacklisted. You can’t join the government. You can’t join big business and your career will be limited. Because very few people are willing to employ someone who is blacklisted by the Chinese authorities … you become a liability to the company.”
Carles Puigdemont, center, addresses Catalan mayors in Barcelona after Parliament declared unilateral independence on October 27.
The justice minister moved fast to distance the Belgian administration from the Catalan leader’s fate. Unlike other international extradition processes, the European arrest warrant (EAW) lies entirely in the hands of the courts, Koen Geens said. “The executive power does not play any role in the EAW procedure. Everything goes through direct contact between the justice authorities,” the Associated Press quoted him as saying.
They filled in documents and left without the police filing charges, according to Reuters. While the Hong Kong government has called the protest illegal, it had not issued warrants for the Occupy leaders’ arrest.
Mr. Talamoni, president of the Corsican assembly, believes independence is the restive Mediterranean island’s destiny and speaks proudly of going to Barcelona “a few times a year.”
On this page you will find today's show Transcript, the Daily Curriculum, and a place for you to leave feedback.  
