Leadsom set out her post-Brexit vision ahead of the vote in a speech that lacked conviction but was peppered with a strong sense of patriotism.
But the Russian military exercises close to Ukraine's eastern border over the past few days may be designed to warn that consequences will in turn have consequences. 
"We want the Ukrainian people to determine their own destiny and have good relations with the United States, Russia, Europe -- anyone they choose," he said, calling for continued diplomatic efforts.
Putin cited in his request a threat posed to the lives of Russian citizens and military personnel based in southern Crimea. Ukrainian officials have vehemently denied Putin's claim. CNN crews in and around Crimea's regional capital of Simferopol, meanwhile, have not seen evidence of a Ukrainian military presence. 
His son, an increasingly strong contender for the Republican presidential nomination, made a similar point in the Senate on Thursday, when he voted against a bill providing aid to Ukraine.
Britain's foreign secretary, William Hague, described the winding up of the G8 as a "huge blow" adding that Obama had made it clear that "it will then be hard to revive that in the immediate future".
Singapore’s biggest lender, DBS Group Holdings, said it would continue to issue loans for properties in the UK capital but was advising customers to be cautious.
The mission may be carried out under the leadership of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), according to statement from the chancellor's office.
United States' take: Russia is responding to its own historic sensitivities about Ukraine, Crimea and their place in Moscow's sphere of influence, a senior White House official told CNN Monday. Russia fears that Ukraine is falling under European or Western influence, the official said.
One bill also stipulates that the accession of a part of a foreign state to Russia should be taken through a referendum, according to Russian state news agency RIA Novosti.
