Following a crackdown in Turkey in the wake of last week’s failed coup attempt, rights charities such as Germany’s Pro Asyl predict there will be a significant increase in the number of intellectuals and scientists leaving posts at Turkish universities and moving to Germany.
Iranians say Russia has often betrayed their country in their long history together. Use of the base is now decided case by case.
On Friday, Turkey’s prime minister, Binali Yıldırım, said on Friday that a second coup attempt was possible because not all those responsible for the last coup had been apprehended, raising fears that the crackdown would continue.
“We are growing closer and closer to the Russians in our cooperation in fighting terrorism,” Mr. Taraghi said. “That’s all I can say.”Yıldırım criticised the US for demanding evidence before it agrees to extradite Fethullah Gülen, an Islamic scholar who Ankara claims is responsible for the coup attempt. “Stop standing up for savages who run over citizens with tanks, who strafe people from land and the air,” he said.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
SANGER: We haven’t given them very much right now.
Idlib’s population grew as rebels and civilians moved there from areas recaptured by Assad forces and allies.
TRUMP: Absolutely. But it was getting to a point where it didn’t make sense. Look at your story today. Give me a break. We are talking about ISIS. We are talking about Iran and Iraq and we are walking about and you put, the biggest story is about, the No. 1 story in The New York Times today is about this? She was terrific. She’s a terrific woman, she’s been with us a long time and she just made the mistake. You saw her letter?
HABERMAN: Protect Meredith?
