“The Telegraph, Mail and Express have published a string of stories on migration, terrorism, crime and control of our borders that contain factual inaccuracies and/or distortions,” it said, announcing plans to complain to the country’s press regulator, the Independent Press Standards Organization, about eight articles.
“Golden Dawn welcomes the victory of the nationalist and patriotic forces in Great Britain against the European Union, which has been transformed into the doleful instrument of loan sharks,” said the party’s leader Nikolaos Michaloliakos.
Syria chemical weapons attack: what we know about deadly air raid Read more
In February, The Sun’s front-page article on migration statistics appeared under the headline “The Great Migrant Con,” highlighting claims of a “migration ‘cover-up.’ ” In March the paper reported on a guide to Polish immigrants on welfare entitlements in Britain with a headline, “How to Be a Pole on the Dole,” referring to the British term for state payments to the jobless.
Discussions I’ve had in the past few weeks have made me even more aware of the fears that many young minority ethnic people have. With so many young graduates struggling to get full-time work, and many sectors lacking diversity and minority representation, the idea of increased immigration can leave young people from migrant backgrounds wondering how this will impact them.
Colin Kahl, a former member of the Obama White House, noted in a tweet that it was “worth remembering there are Russian advisers at nearly every relevant Assad base. Any strike means dead Russians.”
Of course Ukip plays the race card. But I’m still voting for Brexit | Dreda Say Mitchell Read more
"We managed to contact the riot police there, and they told us they had transferred the three of them to 'allies'," said an acquaintance of Zentsev's. "Since then, we have heard not a word at all from them. Through unofficial channels we heard that they are in an FSB prison in Sevastopol and could be transferred to Russia soon."
The IMF’s reports on the UK had been scheduled for Friday but publication was delayed after the murder of Labour MP Jo Cox in West Yorkshire on Thursday.
The FTSE and pound have been buffeted by close opinion polls during the campaign but in the past week market sentiment has swung to show growing confidence in a vote to remain in the EU. The FTSE has rallied every day this week and by Thursday’s close was up 5.3% for the week so far.