“The fact is we’re doing jobs that most British people don’t want to do,” said Anna Pawelec, the manager of Pillars of Hercules, a 150-year-old pub on Greek Street near Soho that has British owners but is run almost entirely by Poles.
To start off, sterling is almost certain to fall steeply and quickly if there is a vote to leave– even more so after yesterday’s rebound as markets reacted to the shift in opinion polls towards remain. I would expect this devaluation to be bigger and more disruptive than the 15% devaluation that occurred in September 1992, when I was fortunate enough to make a substantial profit for my hedge fund investors, at the expense of the Bank of England and the British government.
In theory, businesses and consumers will spend more, stimulating the economy. Low rates also help depress the value of a currency, bolstering exports. And they increase the attractiveness of stock markets, which are considered riskier investments than bonds.
Which takes priority? The referendum vote to exit Europe or the democratically elected government’s decision to remain? Or do we have another referendum? Or another election? Would it not be better to leave things to the government we have elected? If the prime minister cannot deal with his party, that is for him to solve or give up his position, not involve the whole country in deciding “in or out”. In any case it will not solve the problems in the Conservative party, for if the answer is to stay, the Brexiters will not rest until they have called for yet another referendum.
And most economists do not see any risk that inflation will pick up soon, anyway. The global economy is simply too weak. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development has warned that the world is locked in a “low-growth trap.” The International Monetary Fund lowered its economic expansion forecasts at its last meeting in April. And the Federal Reserve in the United States, meeting on Tuesday and Wednesday, is likely to postpone an interest rate increase.
From the European Central Bank’s point of view, low interest rates are the whole point. The bank set a precedent for negative interest rates two years ago when it began charging banks to keep money in its virtual vaults, instead of paying them interest as it did in the past. The so-called negative deposit rate is currently minus 0.4 percent.
The IMF, which has warned of a slowdown in the global economy, urged British policymakers to be on alert for economic shocks and even raised the prospect of a UK interest rate cut.
But to those who claim their business could be crippled without European labor, such talk is a feeble diversion from the elephant in the room in the Brexit debate.
“Victims smelled of bleach, suggesting they had been exposed to chlorine,” the group said in a statement, after detailing symptoms of neurotoxins. “These reports strongly suggest that victims of the attack on Khan Sheikhun were exposed to at least two different chemical agents.”
The pair will publish an “illustrative budget scorecard” comprising a long list of the sort of measures they say may have to be implemented including:
