Images from Khan Sheikhun of victims convulsing and foaming at the mouth caused widespread international outrage. Trump cited the suffering of dozens of children who were among the dead and injured as one of the main reasons he dropped his long-standing opposition military action against Assad.
"If you attack them after they have the nuclear weapons, it's not a preventive war. It's just a plain old nuclear war," Jeffrey Lewis, a nonproliferation expert at the Middlebury Institute of International Studies' James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies, said on a recent podcast.
"Threatening and destabilizing actions only increase the North Korean regime's isolation in the region and among all nations of the world," he said in a statement. "All options are on the table."
Government investigators are also probing the private organization that conducts ship safety inspections on behalf of the government to determine if any wrongdoing was involved in the certification of the Sewol after its 2013 modifications.
The students attended Danwon High School in Ansan, a city about an hour's drive south from the capital, Seoul. 
SDF soldiers misidentified one of their own fighting positions as an Isis hold-out when they called in a strike, the coalition said.
The interview came soon after the US admitted killing 18 fighters from the Syrian Democratic Forces in a friendly-fire incident this week. The Kurdish-led SDF coalition is part of the push towards the Islamic State stronghold of Raqqa, with backing from western bomber jets and drones.
READ: Anchor quits: I can't be part of network 'that whitewashes' Putin's actions
To pay for these programs, Pyongyang has skillfully evaded UN restrictions in order to earn cash, according to a recent report from the United Nations Panel of Experts on North Korea.
Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson, who met on Wednesday in Moscow with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, said afterward that both sides had major differences and could not agree on basic facts concerning Syria and other major issues between the United States and Russia.
