But whatever happens, the overall institution will be deeply damaged for some time.
Already, even as the government has arrested thousands of soldiers and officers who allegedly took part in the failed coup, there were signs that it was using the moment to widen a crackdown on perceived enemies. Alongside the military, the government also dismissed thousands of judges, who seemingly had no role to play in a military revolt.
As Turks waited to see in which direction their mercurial and powerful leader would steer the country in the wake of the coup attempt, Mr. Erdogan struck some conciliatory notes on Sunday. Yet he has also raised the possibility that Turkey would reinstate the death penalty, which it had abolished as a part of its pursuit to join the European Union.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
“Now the army is a tarnished force,” said Hulya Kocaoglu, 55, an administrative assistant in Istanbul whose sons have served. “How do you know who is good and bad? Now, you fear that when your child goes, they could get involved with the wrong crowd and be brainwashed or sacrificed.”“It was nice here today,” said Ali Tuysuz, 19, who was selling watermelon slices on Saturday in Taksim. “People are happy and buying watermelon. My tray was emptied three times. President Erdogan will protect the country.”
"He called me from a police station," she says. "He wasn't aware of the coup. He was told he was going out for a drill. He is very scared."
"There's been quite a lot of nonsense spoken on both sides," said Rob McNeil of the Migration Observatory, an impartial body at Oxford University.
Confronting a coup
