A lot has changed since then. The oligarchs' investments have bolstered the region's economy substantially. "Donetsk today is almost unrecognisable to the place I first visited in the 90s," says Swain. "The infrastructure and standard of living have improved immensely. The oligarchs have won respect here for their role in this."
Britain will become the first country to leave the 28-member bloc, which has been increasingly weighed down by its failures to deal fully with a succession of crises, from the financial collapse of 2008 to a resurgent Russia and the huge influx of migrants last year.
"My sense is that most folks in Oxford are surprised this morning," Kathleen Lawton-Trask, an American who says she's lived in the city for almost five years, wrote on Instagram.
Have you been affected by the attempted coup in Turkey? Read more
It began as a routine ocean trip on calm seas. Passengers bound for a resort island were just stirring, some eating breakfast. 
“Britain will be fine without the E.U., and Scotland, too.”There was no emotional argument for the EU that had any resonance with these voters. For committed remain and leave voters, the decision was often passionately held and part of a wider worldview. For the “hearts v heads” voters it was a pragmatic, often transactional, decision. Like almost everyone else, they were worried about immigration – but the economic implications of Brexit mattered even more. Our challenge was to cut through with hard economic arguments – so that head would trump heart. This is where the campaign failed and the referendum was lost.
Bank of England governor Mark Carney has sought to calm financial market fears about the impact of the UK’s Brexit vote by insisting that Threadneedle Street will take any measures needed to secure economic and financial stability.
And the paper was also swift to turn the heat on the leader of the opposition with an inside story, “Corbyn blow as Labour heartlands vote Leave.”
The former Labour leader Ed Miliband said: “It’s a nation divided and the PM will have a big responsibility – particularly if it’s a remain win – to show he understands what people are saying on the leave side of the argument. Labour faces that responsibility too.
