Chemring told the Guardian it acted “in accordance with, and is heavily regulated by the UK government”. It added that its sales were therefore “ultimately controlled by the UK government through the issue of export licences, and end-user certificates”. It said it could not comment on what its future policies may be as a result of the situation in Hong Kong but it would clearly review them.
Protesters in Hong Kong calling for democracy reforms are being targeted by spyware that can affect both iPhones and smartphones running Google’s Android software, a security company claims.
He worked as an engineer and made enough money to help support his parents, along with his four sisters and three brothers.
While the city enjoys many more legal freedoms than China -- including, crucially, the right to assembly -- this can be a brickbat for pro-Beijing voices. 
Photos of police confronting young pro-democracy protesters are sensitive in China, because it's a reminder of Tiananamen Square, in which Chinese authorities cracked down on student protesters on June 4, 1989, Fu said. 
One of the tenets contained in the Basic Law, and reaffirmed by Lu Ping, China's then-top official on Hong Kong, was the right to develop its own democracy. "How Hong Kong develops its democracy in the future is completely within the sphere of the autonomy of Hong Kong," Lu was quoted as saying in the state media People's Daily in March 1993. "The central government will not interfere."
They both have strong political credentials and managerial experience, she said.
"We created the Refugee Union to fight ... against the system with more power," he said.
In Hong Kong, residents have poured into the streets to defy Beijing's vision for its political future in the midst of its longest series of political protests since the 1997 handover. Their goal is to pressure China into giving the former British colony full universal suffrage. Dozens have been reported injured by authorities. 
With his floppy hair, baggy shorts and stripy T-shirt, accessorised with a yellow ribbon around each skinny wrist, the only thing distinguishing the 17-year-old from the other teenagers on Wednesday was the bank of television cameras facing him.
