He also brushed aside a question on suspected Russian hacking of Macron’s campaign, saying it was just media speculation and therefore not for politicians to comment on. Putin defended meeting Le Pen and said it absolutely did not mean that Moscow had sought to influence the election result.
"As the President whose thoughts and heart are together with you, I call on each reasonable citizen of Ukraine -- don't let the imposters use you! Demand a referendum on the determination of the status of each region within Ukraine," Yanukovych said in an address to the Ukrainian people.
He said that a referendum for all the regions was the only way to stabilize the country, and that early presidential elections planned for May will be neither fair nor constitutional. 
Speaking to the state-run newspaper Rossiskaya Gazeta, in comments first noted by the Moscow Times, Seagal described western policy on Ukraine as "idiotic". He said Putin's desire "to protect the Russian-speaking people of Crimea, his assets, and the Russian Black Sea military base in Sevastopol … [was] very reasonable".
In an interview Tuesday with PBS, acting Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said Ukraine is struggling to maintain a fighting capability after it was "deliberately dismantled" under Yanukovych. He said his government ceded Crimea without a shot to demonstrate to the world that Russia was the aggressor, he said. But if Moscow moves against another portion of Ukraine, "We will fight."
Yanukovych also said he wished to be removed from his post as chairman of the Party of the Regions.
In a dramatic announcement two days before the final vote, Macron’s team said thousands of its campaign emails had been released in a major hacking operation. Cybersecurity analysts suggested the operation might have been undertaken by Russia-affiliated groups. Moscow and Russian news outlets had rejected any allegations of interference.
But Macron said France would show “no weakness” if chemical weapons were used, and would immediately respond.
Neither the Kremlin nor the White House said what those steps might be. The White House said Mr. Putin was responding to an American proposal that Secretary of State John Kerry presented to Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov during a meeting at The Hague earlier in the week, a proposal developed in consultation with Ukraine’s interim government and European allies.
White House: Putin, Obama discuss possible 'diplomatic solution' in Ukraine
