Others feared what would happen to rebel-held northern Syria. Turkey has all but stopped letting Syrians cross into Turkey itself, but it has long provided support to the communities and rebels suffering on the other side of its southern border.
In Crimea, by contrast, the shadowy Russian troops are equipped with the latest gear – they are professionals, not amateur homegrown revolutionaries. Ukrainian officials point to the GRU, Russian military intelligence. And the warp-speed tempo of events in Crimea is being dictated from the top, not the bottom – from Moscow, rather than the street.
But for some, the anxiety continues. While some want to actively show their support for Erdoğan, others see danger in being associated with any particular political faction. After the Syrian charity Dubarah posted a Facebook message that advised Syrians to stay out of Turkish politics, it sparked a wide range of responses.
Overnight, alleged undercover Russian special forces seized control of Simferopol airport, in the administrative capital of Crimea. The move comes less than 24 hours after a similar squad of shadowy, well-armed, Russian-speaking gunmen seized Simferopol's parliament building and administrative complex. If anyone was in doubt what this meant, the gunmen left a clue. They raised a Russian flag above the parliament building.
Crowds also gather at Istanbul's airport-- the site of a terror attack just two weeks ago.
European leaders this week cautioned Erdoğan against reintroducing the death penalty, warning that it will result in Turkey being barred from joining the EU.
“No other party apart from Erdoğan’s declared anything about being sympathetic to Syrians,” says Qassoum. “So that made me fear the worst.”
Video and photos on social media show large crowds marching through the streets, some taunting soldiers as Turkish military fire guns in the air.

But another responded: “Stay at home. Whatever happens, happens. It’s none of your business. Or else what happened in Egypt will happen again.”
