Currently, the NBA has no rules prohibiting a foreign company from owning an NBA team.
Karen G. Shakhnazarov, 61, the head of Mosfilm, Russia’s major movie studio, said he signed first in memory of his father, who fought in the Red Army to liberate Crimea from the Nazis. More important, Mr. Shakhnazarov signed because, he said, Ukraine lacks a legitimate government, and the people in Crimea “have the right to choose their fate themselves.”
Prokhorov became principal owner of the Nets in 2010. He bought 80% of the team, as well as a 45% stake in the Barclays Center, the iconic new facility the team has called home since 2012.
Additional intelligence suggests that more Russian forces are "reinforcing" the border region, according to both Obama administration officials. Russian troops already in the border region include air defense artillery and wheeled vehicles, and all the troops are positioned for potential military action.
But voices just as adamant urged caution, and few lawmakers said they were eager for a military confrontation. Mr. Corker said more punitive actions should be threatened only if Russia moved farther into Ukraine or threatened neighbors like Moldova. Senator Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, another member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said military assistance to a Ukrainian force of about 6,000 trained troops against the Russian military would be fruitless.
European Council President Donald Tusk described the Catalonia situation as "concerning" but said there was "no space for EU intervention," in remarks Thursday in Brussels.The United States and Europe recognize that sanctions could have wider global implications, especially for those countries reliant on Russian oil and natural gas, Obama said. But discussions are under way on making it easier to export U.S. natural gas to Europe, as well as on other trade issues, he said.
Courtney Brunious, associate director of the USC Marshall Sports Business Institute, said such a move in the sports world could be complicated by the current political situation. 
France also helped spearhead the EU’s economic sanctions on Russia over the seizure of Crimea and Russian backing for insurgents in the east of the former Soviet republic. Putin’s Versailles visit meant Macron was the first western leader to speak to Putin following the G7 summit this weekend, where western leaders agreed to consider new measures against Moscow if the situation in Ukraine did not improve.
Vladimir Putin's decision to annexe the Crimean peninsula may be opposed by the combined political might of Europe and the USA, but one man stands ready to defend the Russian president. Action hero Steven Seagal, who considers Putin a personal friend, has labelled the former KGB lieutenant colonel "one of the greatest world leaders" and declared his actions in the Russian-majority Ukrainian province "very reasonable".
