At the beginning of the signal, their calculations told them how stars perish: the two objects had begun by circling each other 30 times a second. By the end of the 20 millisecond snatch of data, the two had accelerated to 250 times a second before the final collision and a dark, violent merger.
The finding completed the scientific arc of prediction, discovery and confirmation: first they calculated what they should be able to detect, then decided what the evidence should look like, and then devised the experiment that clinched the matter. Which is why on Thursday scientists around the world were able to hail the announcement as yet another confirmation of their “standard model” of the cosmos, and the beginning of a new era of discovery.
Gravitational waves: 'we can hear the universe' – live Read more
Even before the Ligo detectors in two US states reopened for business late last year, researchers were confident that a detection would follow swiftly. The announcement came after months of speculation, and decades of theoretical and practical work by an international network of more than a thousand scientists and engineers in Britain, Europe, the US and around the world.
Then there is the experiment. As gravitational waves pass through the Earth (and now we know for sure they must be doing this all the time) they distort distances, compressing them in one direction while stretching them in the perpendicular direction. The experiment measures the ratio of these distances, down to a precision of thousandths of the size of a proton. This achievement, and the scientific discipline required to make sure you are not fooling yourself, is daunting.
The observation signals the opening of a new window on to the universe.

"What's really exciting is what comes next," said Reitze at the announcement. "I think we're opening a window on the universe -- a window of gravitational wave astronomy."
If you didn’t fully grasp Thursday’s blockbuster announcement that scientists had detected gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric of spacetime that were first anticipated by Albert Einstein a century ago, you were not alone.
Still don’t understand the groundbreaking discovery? We asked scientists to break it down so that even a five-year-old could understand
