Russia says that ousted Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, whom Moscow still recognizes as the country's legitimate leader, requested that Russia send in military forces.
"We should do it, frankly," he told CNN, but adding that Russia should be offered an "exit ramp" out of the crisis through negotiations.
At a personal level the sanctions will be felt acutely by those officials who have assets in the west, as some of them almost certainly do.
“The issue that is at stake today isn’t the independence — or not — of Catalonia,” Raül Romeva, Catalonia’s foreign affairs chief, told a group of foreign correspondents in Madrid on Wednesday, “but democracy in Spain and the European Union.”
"That's exactly right," the RT editor-in-chief, Margarita Simonyan, wrote in response.
In Vienna, where I live, one also hears constant mentions of 1938. Austrians and other citizens of European Union countries are beginning to consider what the end of Ukraine might mean for their own European system. The point is not that Putin is like Hitler; the point is that the removal of a state from Europe has consequences for the continent.  
And it has not only been Ukraine that has recently faced economic pressure to toe the line. For Kiev that meant tighter customs controls last year, when Ukraine was flirting with an association with the EU. But Belarus too, although on a far lesser scale, has been punished in the recent past for seeking economic aid from China.
The local council had tried to ban any further demonstrations this weekend following the bloodshed on Thursday, but the Donetsk District Court rejected the request, saying there was no evidence of any danger to the public. 
"(Putin) has put all the military units he would need to move into Ukraine on its eastern border and is doing exercises. We see him moving forces in the south in a position where they could take the southern region over to Moldova," Rogers said on NBC's "Meet the Press."
In contrast, Russia acted unilaterally in Crimea – and officially, the Russian government still denies that Russian troops are the ones controlling the territory.
