The referendum was not just a violation of democratic norms and Ukrainian law, it was a clear violation of international law.
Their comments came as Acting President Oleksandr Turchinov told parliament Tuesday that an interim unity government in Ukraine would be appointed Thursday, raising the specter of continued instability here in the wake of the ouster of President Viktor Yanukovych.
The 39-year-old took the helm of Tymoshenko's Fatherland party after the latter's imprisonment in 2011.
"Although the Department of Defense finds value in the military-to-military relationship with the Russian Federation we have developed over the past few years to increase transparency, build understanding, and reduce the risk of military miscalculation, we have, in light of recent events in Ukraine, put on hold all military-to-military engagements between the United States and Russia. This includes exercises, bilateral meetings, port visits and planning conferences," said Pentagon Press Secretary Rear Adm. John Kirby.
In a recent letter to Obama, Corker and 11 other members of the committee called on the US to use “tools at its disposal, including targeted sanctions; and asset recovery targeting corruption, to dissuade individuals who would foment unrest to undermine Ukraine’s territorial integrity”.No country annexed Kosovo, and that experience has little in common with Crimea. No one has accused the new Ukrainian government of persecuting Crimea's Russians the way Serbian forces ever did.
Klishas said on Monday he was unperturbed by the sanctions, since he doesn't own property in the US.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, a regional security bloc, sent in 10 monitors Monday, and Kerry called for a larger mission.
But Republicans are pushing for the legislation, which could be introduced as soon as Thursday and proceed to markup as early as 11 March, to also include clauses that would compel president Barack Obama’s legislation to direct sanctions against senior Russian officials close to president Vladimir Putin.
Russia has millions of Muslims of its own, the vast majority of whom are Sunni, including next door in the North Caucasus. Historically, the Crimean Tatars had close ties with the Circassians, who were driven from the Sochi area in 1864. And one reason why Putin has invested so much in backing Assad's Alawite regime in Syria against the Sunni majority was his fear of Sunni unrest at home.
