This has not yet happened, Murphy said.
• The headline to this article was amended on 12 February 2016. An earlier version said the discovery was a breakthrough after two centuries of expectation. This has been corrected.Physicists believe some kind of dark matter exists because astronomers can detect the gravitational pull it exerts on stars and galaxies. But dark matter itself is not only invisible, it has never been detected directly or indirectly by other means. Scientists have suggested that dark matter comprises “weakly interacting massive particles” (Wimps), leftover material from the big bang that pass through normal matter and leave no trace but in gravity.
Firstly, we have seen ripples in space-time! And the fact that we expected them makes that even more amazing in some ways. The understanding of the fabric of the universe which is contained in Einstein’s general relativity has made yet another valid prediction. In fact, the beautiful elegance of that theory is a little deceptive – actually solving those equations to get a real prediction, which tells you what kind of experiment you need to build to test the prediction, is a major mathematical challenge and a towering achievement in itself.
At AAAS researchers looking for another type of mysterious particle, a fourth type of neutrino, called “sterile” because it does not carry even the weak charges as does its neutral counterparts – the normal neutrinos. Kam-Biu Luk, a physicist at the University of California at Berkeley, announced new data showing an “unexpected disagreement between our observation and predictions” in the search for the particles.
And they did so within weeks of turning on their new, upgraded instrument: it took just 20 milliseconds to catch the merger of two black holes, at a distance of 1.3 billion light years, somewhere beyond the Large Magellanic Cloud in the southern hemisphere sky, but it then took months of meticulous checking of the signal against all the complex computer simulations of black hole collision to make sure the evidence matched the theoretical template.
However, the waves are so small that it takes a detector like LIGO, capable of measuring distortions one-thousandth the size of a proton, to observe them. They were observed on September 14, 2015.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
"A physicist is always looking for a flaw in a theory. And the only way to find a flaw is to test it," Marka told CNN. "Einstein's theory did not present any flaws to us yet, and that is really scary. Physicists are very (skeptical) of flawless theories because then we have nothing to do."
Scientists heard the sound of the black holes colliding as a "chirp" lasting one-fifth of a second. Though gravitational waves aren't sound waves, the increase in frequency the collision exhibited in its last milliseconds -- when the black holes were mere kilometers apart and growing closer -- is a frequency we can hear, said Deirdre Shoemaker, a Georgia Tech physicist who works on LIGO.
