“It made sense to expand into Eastern Europe,” said Eleni Papoula, an analyst at Berenberg Bank. “But the strategy did not work out the way they expected.”
The deputy prime ministerClegg said he was "extraordinarily surprised" that the Ukip leader had allowed his "loathing of the EU" to prompt him to say in their televised LBC debate that the EU had blood on its hands in Ukraine.
A spokesman for Raiffeisen declined to comment ahead of the release on Thursday of fourth-quarter financial results. The bank, whose shares have fallen 29 percent since Jan. 23, has scheduled a news conference in Vienna on Thursday at which Karl Sevelda, the chief executive, is likely to face intense questioning about Russia and Ukraine.
Perhaps surprisingly, Russia is not even a big customer for the City of London's banks and law firms. The UK sold £1.2bn of banking advice and insurance to Russia in 2012: a big number, but only 1% of UK financial service exports, according to analysis by the Open Europe thinktank.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Rajoy said Saturday that Puigdemont had repeatedly rejected opportunities to talk to Madrid before calling the banned referendum and insisted his own government was acting to protect the interests of all Spaniards, especially Catalans.
According to the White House, Putin called to talk about an American proposal "for a diplomatic resolution to the crisis" and the two presidents agreed that their respective top diplomats "would meet to discuss next steps."
Today, though, this scenario seems unlikely. Not counting the risks associated with Russian expansion and the West’s dilatory attitude, corrupt habits and social divisions within Ukraine are a major obstacle. Another obstacle may be the West itself, which, if it presses for too-severe economic reforms in exchange for too-paltry economic assistance, may well bring the same people out into the Maidan.
The perils of the Austrian strategy became apparent in 2008 at the start of the financial crisis. Only emergency intervention by the International Monetary Fund and the European Union prevented panic among foreign investors.
Also in Moscow, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu said that Ukrainian troops in Crimea who had chosen to remain in the Ukrainian Armed Forces had withdrawn. "The change in state symbols on all ships and in all divisions that have sided with the Russian army has been completed," he said. 
