In terms of Moscow's foreign policy in what it calls its "near abroad" – the states of the former Soviet Union – that means a complex set of assumptions that informs not only the Russian intervention in Crimea on Friday, but how it exerts power and influence on its neighbours. In recent Russian history that has been encapsulated in overlapping notions, where Moscow's sphere of influence in the post-Soviet region intersects with areas with Russian-speaking populations and a wider Slavic culture.
Interim Finance Minister Yury Kolobov proposed Monday that an international donor conference be held within two weeks. Ukraine, he said, will need $35 billion in foreign assistance by the end of 2015.
Armoured personnel carriers are seen rolling along the highways, while Vladimir Zhirinovsky, a Russian hardliner and Kremlin politician, has been rousing crowds by bellowing into microphones about Moscow's military might. In town centres, crowds of babushkas, their fur hats askew, can be heard chanting: "To Russia, to Russia."
Meanwhile, Ukraine's largest telecom firm was unable to provide data and voice connectivity between Crimea and the rest of Ukraine because unknown people had seized telecommunications nodes and destroyed cables, it said Friday. There is almost no phone connectivity or Internet service across Crimea, said Ukrtelecom, which is the only landline provider.
The Hong Kong Federation of Students said the protesters took the action after Hong Kong’s government leader, Leung Chun-ying, refused to meet them.
Men in military uniforms had been seen patrolling the airport in Simferopol, as well as a military and civilian airbase in nearby Sevastopol since early Friday.
The Night Wolves are the latest addition to this circus. They say they are ready to defend Crimea against all unwanted intrusions, namely western authorities and the new administration in Kiev, seen by many in the region as bandits and terrorists who seized power illegally.
Tok Geok Peng, an executive director for consumer lending at DBS Bank, said: “For customers interested in buying properties in London, we would advise them to assess the situation carefully before committing to their purchases as there could be potential foreign exchange and sovereign risks.”
The new Prime Minister told parliament that he cannot promise to turn things around quickly and that there is likely to be pain in the short term as the cash-strapped country seeks to get back on track.
Weapons were not used during the operation, according to Avakov, the interior minister. 
