The independence movement picked up steam after that 2010 case, which came amid the economic woes of the global financial crisis.
MADRID — A judge who sits on Spain’s Supreme Court on Thursday granted bail to a handful of Catalan lawmakers awaiting trial on rebellion charges in contrast with the jailing last week of former members of the Catalan government.
It's unlikely Rajoy will be receptive to the appeal. He has refused to meet with Puigdemont, who went to Brussels after Spanish authorities announced they were seeking his arrest . Rajoy says he will meet only with leaders of the pro-unity Ciutadans (Citizens) party.Spanish government sources insist that the establishment of parliamentary commission on constitutional reform is a genuine attempt to move on from the dispute. Fresh elections have been called for the Catalan parliament.
Madrid has consistently taken a tough line with the Catalan secessionists since the crisis exploded in recent months, culminating in the referendum on 1 October and the Catalan government’s unilateral declaration of independence on 27 October. Rajoy responded by stepping in to take control of the region and sacking the Catalan regional government.
A cross-party commission on potential constitutional reform opened discussions last week on a new settlement between the Catalans and the Spanish government, with the support of the prime minister, Mariano Rajoy.
A fiscal pact was proposed in 2012 by Catalonia’s then president, Artur Mas, but the Spanish government blocked the move over concerns that it would be destabilising at a time when Spain appeared to be in dire economic peril.
“We are open to discuss this, taking into account that the constitution of Spain also establishes solidarity [among the Spanish regions].”
“If the Catalans ask for a fiscal pact, we are ready to discuss this,” one senior source said. “The Basque country [in northern Spain] and Navarre collect their own taxes. They have their own system and there is a meeting between the Basque country and the central government and they decide how much they contribute to foreign policy and defence. It‘s a negotiation. Every five years.
Senior sources in the Spanish government have told the Guardian that although there remains intense opposition within the ruling People’s party (PP) to any future referendum on self-determination, there is a renewed willingness to open discussions on a new fiscal pact under which Catalonia would have greater control of its finances.
