It was Mr. Trump’s most important order so far for the use of force — virtually all of his administration’s other operations in Syria, Yemen and Iraq have been carried out under authorization delegated to his commanders — and appeared intended to send a message to North Korea, Iran and other potential adversaries that the new commander in chief was prepared to act, sometimes on short notice.
Russia, Assad’s principal backer in the war, has said the air raids targeted a rebel warehouse that contained chemical weapons that then leaked out to the surrounding area.
“How can they justify using fake evidence to blame innocent people?” I once asked my disillusioned Gulenist friend. “Since their end goal is so great,” he said, referring to the movement’s global, apocalyptic ambition, “they think all means are justified.”
'The dead were wherever you looked': inside Syrian town after chemical attack Read more
It eventually became clear why the Gulenists had been so fervent in their persecution of the secularists: They wanted to replace them. Many of the officers who reportedly took part in last week’s coup attempt had been promoted thanks to a major purge of the military in 2009 that supposedly saved Mr. Erdogan from a coup.
The Turkish health minister Recep Akdağ said isopropyl methylphosphonic acid, a chemical that sarin degrades into, was found in the blood and urine samples taken from the patients who arrived in Turkey. Some 30 victims were brought across the border following the attack last Tuesday, and a number of them have died.
Tests on victims find traces of substance sarin degrades into while Russia claims they come from leaked chemicals stored in nearby rebel warehouse
TRUMP: I was familiar, but it wasn’t used for that reason. It was used as a brand-new, very modern term.
TRUMP: And she came and she said, “Mr. Trump, I’d like to say what happened.” I thought it was such a nice thing.
SANGER: You’ve seen several of those countries come under cyberattack, things that are short of war, clearly appear to be coming from Russia.
