“We’ve got to do this now, because once he goes in, what are we going to do, put boots on the ground?” asked Senator Kelly Ayotte, Republican of New Hampshire.
But voices just as adamant urged caution, and few lawmakers said they were eager for a military confrontation. Mr. Corker said more punitive actions should be threatened only if Russia moved farther into Ukraine or threatened neighbors like Moldova. Senator Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, another member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said military assistance to a Ukrainian force of about 6,000 trained troops against the Russian military would be fruitless.
“A lot depends on what Russia does,” Mr. Cardin said. “If this becomes a frozen conflict involving only Crimea, I don’t know how much more we will see from us.”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Congress will try to reconcile the two bills that passed on Thursday. Senator Robert Menendez of New Jersey, the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, said a path had been cleared to get the bill to the president before the end of the week.
To match the two bills, the Senate will move to pass a House bill to authorize the broadcast of Western news programs into Ukraine and the region, and the House will take up the Senate aid-and-sanctions bill in order to pass it by a voice vote on Friday.
In addition to providing money to Ukraine, the bills would formalize sanctions authorized recently by Mr. Obama and expand the list of individuals and entities targeted for sanctions.
Unlike the president’s executive order last week, the Senate’s sanctions are mandatory and do not grant Mr. Obama latitude to choose which penalties to apply.
The bill also makes mandatory the application of sanctions on any Russian official found to have engaged in corruption in Ukraine, a broader category than any applied by the administration. The Senate measure would give the administration more flexibility to apply economic sanctions against any Russian official engaged in corrupt activity and anyone who assists in such activities.
In all, with financing provided by the International Monetary Fund, the United States and the European Union, Ukraine stands to receive up to $27 billion to help it avoid default and to carry it through emergency presidential elections in May.