The US and European Union have imposed sanctions on Russian and Ukrainian officials in response to Russian actions in Ukraine, which culminated on Sunday in Crimea's vote to join Russia. But Washington also appeared to be settling old scores, as several officials slapped with sanctions have had little to do with Russia's Ukraine policy, while some of the country's main Ukraine hawks were not on the list.
The executive order by President Barack Obama to impose a travel ban and asset freeze on 11 officials was meant to rebuke Russia for "actions that violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, including their actions supporting the illegal referendum for Crimean separation", the White House said in a statement.
The Russian reaction to the list was derisive. Influential blogger Rustem Adagamov called the sanctions "a joke" in a tweet, and deputy prime minister Dmitry Rogozin, who is on the list, tweeted that "some sort of prankster wrote the US president's decree."
"I don't see any logic in this list," said Yevgeny Minchenko, a political analyst who studies power relationships between Kremlin elites.
Asked who wields real influence over Russia's impending decision on whether to accept Crimea, Minchenko said "only one person, [Vladimir] Putin, is making the decision on Crimea, and sanctions against him are not possible."
Putin is expected to set forth the country's position on the Crimean referendum, in which 95% of voters sought to join Russia, when he addresses parliamentarians on Tuesday. Western officials have said sanctions will not be adopted against Putin because he is a head of state.
At a personal level the sanctions will be felt acutely by those officials who have assets in the west, as some of them almost certainly do.
It was not clear what moves Russia could take in response to sanctions. MP Sergei Mironov, leader of the party A Just Russia, suggested Russia could leave the World Trade Organisation, which he has always opposed, but analysts have said practically there is little the country could do to respond.
In its statement, the White House offered little explanation of its choice of names, referring only to the official positions of the Russian politicians. Here is a list of the officials, their significance and how sanctions could hurt them.
Vladislav Surkov
Once known as the "grey cardinal" of the Kremlin, presidential aide Surkov is credited with drawing on his background in theatre to devise the system of "managed" or "sovereign democracy," in which parliamentary parties have ostensibly competed with each other in elections but nonetheless have come together to support the Kremlin line at key moments. However, Surkov's influence declined after the rise of mass opposition protests in 2011-12. He was essentially fired from his position as deputy prime minister and chief of staff last May, shortly after he criticised the powerful Investigative Committee in remarks at the London School of Economics and after Putin dressed him down publicly over not fulfilling presidential decrees.
Surkov is a well-known but largely symbolic target for US sanctions, since his role as the man in charge of the Kremlin domestic policy has been assumed by Vyacheslav Volodin, who was not on the list. Surkov's ex-wife Yulia Vishnevskaya lives in London, and Surkov is likely to have assets there.
Sergei Glazyev
Presidential adviser Glazyev, a lifelong bureaucrat and former state Duma deputy, Glazyev is nominally responsible for Russia's relations with Ukraine, making him an obvious target for sanctions. But his inclusion may also be more of a symbolic blow than a painful one. A founder of the now-defunct nationalist party Rodina, Glazyev often serves as a mouthpiece for hardline stances that are ultimately eschewed for more moderate policies. Most recently, Glazyev said the Kremlin would drop the dollar as a reserve currency and write off Russian companies' debts to US banks if the US implemented asset freezes against Russian officials. But analysts dismissed the threats as unrealistic, as they do more harm to the stability of government reserves and the Russian economy than they would to the US.
Leonid Slutsky
As chairman of the Duma committee on CIS affairs, Eurasian integration and relations with compatriots, Slutsky has vocally supported the Crimean referendum, announcing on Sunday that no serious violations had been observed in the course of the vote. (International observers were not present after being barred entry to Crimea last week.) Never a particularly high-profile lawmaker before this, Slutsky, a member of the nationalist LDPR party, nonetheless has been noted to meet often with Patriarch Kirill of the Russian Orthodox Church.
Anti-corruption campaigner Alexei Navalny, who has published exposés on the domestic and international real estate of several prominent officials, tweeted that "sanctions will be a problem" for Slutsky and Andrei Klishas (see below). But Slutsky said he doesn't have assets in the US, Rossiya-24 television reported. However, Slutsky has only officially reported assets in Russia, including three apartments, a house and a land plot.
Andrei Klishas
Chairman of the Federation Council committee of constitutional law, judicial and legal affairs and the development of civil society, Klishas most recently was in the news for announcing earlier this month that 5,500 Ukrainians had applied for Russian citizenship, an 80% increase since the start of the crisis there. However, reports of a huge flow of Ukrainians into Russia were later reported to be false.
Klishas said on Monday he was unperturbed by the sanctions, since he doesn't own property in the US.
"I like the company that I'm in," he said about the list, state news agency RIA Novosti reported. In fact, neither US nor EU sanctions are likely to touch Klishas's property abroad: Vedomosti newspaper reported in 2012 that Klishas owns a home in Switzerland.
Valentina Matviyenko
The governor of Russia's second city of St Petersburg until 2011, Matviyenko has long been a political ally of Putin, who is also from the city. Although Matviyenko remains prominent as the head of the Federation Council, that legislative body has been decried as a rubber-stamp body. So while she has been outspoken on the Ukraine crisis, criticising the new Kiev government and denying that Russia would forcefully intervene there, she is likely to have little influence on major policy decisions. Matviyenko called the sanctions "political blackmail" but said she didn't have assets abroad, Interfax news agency reported.
Dmitry Rogozin
Rogozin enjoys real influence as deputy prime minister for the defence and space industry, Russia's biggest exports outside of oil and gas. (A recent study by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute found Russia is second only to the US for arms exports, with 27% of the worldwide total.) Nonetheless, he has arguably not played a huge role in the response to the Ukraine crisis.Like Klishas, Rogozin brushed off the sanctions against him, "thanking" the US for "real international recognition" in a tweet on Monday. He also implied he didn't have property abroad to worry about. "Comrade Obama, what about those who have neither accounts nor property abroad? Or you didn't think about that?" Rogozin tweeted.
Yelena Mizulina
The White House statement said only that Mizulina is being sanctioned for her status as a state Duma deputy, but Washington has ample reason to want revenge against her. Besides being a main author of Russia's controversial law against gay propaganda among children, Mizulina authored the bill that banned the adoption of Russian children by American families. She has also threatened to ban adoptions by same-sex couples.
Although she hasn't been very vocal on Ukraine, Mizulina did, at the request of her party leader Mironov, draft legislation last month that would speed the process for Ukrainians to receive Russian citizenship.
The deputy's son, Nikolay Mizulin, reportedly lives in Belgium, meaning an EU travel ban against her would hit close to home.
Sergei Aksyonov
The new prime minister of Crimea, Aksyonov has led the drive to secede and join Russia, and the White House statement said he was being sanctioned "for threatening the peace, security, stability, sovereignty, or territorial integrity of Ukraine, and for undermining Ukraine's democratic institutions and processes".
Aksyonov has been reported to have been an organised crime boss in the 1990s, when he was supposedly known by the nickname "Goblin", although he denies allegations of a criminal past.
Vladimir Konstantinov
As the speaker of the Crimean parliament, Konstantinov has also pushed for Crimea to join Russia, and the White House explanation of his inclusion mirrored that of Aksyonov.
Viktor Medvedchuk
Leader of the Ukrainian Choice party, which is pro-Russian, Medvedchuk is "also being designated because he has materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support to Yanukovych", the White House statement said. He is known as a key ally and right-hand man of President Viktor Yanukovich. During the Euromaidan demonstrations, Medvedchuk was accused of organising the repression of protestors, including the beating of critical journalist Tetiana Chornovol.
Viktor Yanukovych
Deposed president Yanukovych has called for Ukrainian territorial integrity to be preserved, making him perhaps an odd inclusion in this particular list. However, he did reportedly ask the Russian government in a letter to intervene to restore order in Ukraine. Yanukovych, whose luxurious mansion evoked anger in Kiev when the opposition first entered it, is accused along with his "family" of close associates of having extensive assets abroad. The Ukrainian government has previously sought western help in tracing bank accounts controlled by Yanukovych and his cronies.
Officials targeted by European Union sanctions
Sergei Zheleznyak
Zheleznyak, who despite being only 43 is deputy speaker of the state Duma and a high-ranking member of the ruling United Russia party, is known to be close to the Kremlin and often introduces pieces of legislation the presidential administration seeks to pass. He has also been involved in a variety of moralistic legislative projects, including the controversial law against gay propaganda among minors.
In recent weeks, Zheleznyak has become the leading spokesman for government policy on Ukraine, painting the Kiev government as fascist, pushing measures to ease the Russian citizenship process for Crimeans and promising to accept Crimea into Russia as quickly as possible. "He led personally the demonstration in support of the use of Russian armed forces in Ukraine," the EU legislation said.
Zheleznyak called the sanctions "media noise" and said he would have been surprised if he wasn't included after making "principled statements in Russia and Europe," Interfax news agency reported.
Zheleznyak admitted three of his daughters were attending schools abroad after anti-corruption campaigner Alexei Navalny reported in 2012 that one was studying in London and two studied in Switzerland, but said he had no accounts or real estate outside Russia.
Sergei Mironov
State Duma deputy Mironov, who heads the party A Just Russia, famously said that he would vote for Putin in the 2004 presidential election, even though he was running as a candidate himself. Like the leaders of the other three parliamentary parties, Mironov has loudly supported intervention in Ukraine. The EU sanctions legislation said he was included as the initiator of a Crimea-focused bill allowing Russia to absorb territories of another country if its government cannot protect the citizens there and if they pass a referendum to join Russia – legislation that the US and EU have called illegal.
Although Mironov said Russia may leave the WTO if Europe passes economic sanctions against Russia, he said on Monday that sanctions against officials didn't frighten him.
"That possibility doesn't scare me at all. I love to travel and vacation in Russia," Mironov said, the official parliamentary newspaper reported.
Mironov also ordered the drafting of legislation on easing the Russian citizenship process for Ukrainians.
Pyotr Zima
After being appointed by the Crimean prime minister, Sergey Aksyonov, as the new head of the Crimean security service, Zima gave information on Euromaidan activists and human rights defenders to Russian intelligence and "played a relevant role in preventing Ukraine's authorities from controlling the territory in Crimea," the EU legislation notes. He was previously the head of the Ukrainian security service branch in Sevastopol, the largely Russian city in Crimea that houses the Russian Black Sea fleet.
Valentin Nalivaichenko, head of the Ukrainian security service, also recently accused Zima and Aksyonov of being involved in the shooting of protestors in Kiev in January.
Nikolai Ryzhkov
The 84-year-old Ryzhkov was an important Soviet apparatchik during the perestroika era, but his major political achievements are in the distant past. After losing to Boris Yeltsin in the first Russian presidential election, Ryzhkov served as a State Duma deputy before taking a less active role in politics by joining the Federation Council in 2003. Nonetheless, Ryzhkov joined the chorus against the new Kiev government and supported Russian humanitarian aid to Crimea. The EU sanctions legislation faults him, along with most of the other Russian politicians, of supporting the troop deployment in Crimea.
Rustam Temirgaliev
The EU accused Temirgaliev – as deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers of Crimea – of playing an important role in running the referendum and lobbying "actively for integration of Crimea into the Russian Federation".
Deniz Berezovskiy
Berezovskiy was accused of breaking an oath he took when he was appointed commander of the Ukrainian navy earlier this month. According to the Council, the prosecutor general of Ukraine's office of Ukraine launched an investigation against him for high treason.
Aleksei Chaliy
Announcing the sanctions, the EU said: "Chaliy became 'Mayor of Sevastopol' by popular acclamation on 23 February 2014 and accepted this 'vote'." It added that he actively campaigned for Sevastopol to become part of Russia following the referendum.
Yuriy Zherebtsov
A senior member of the Crimean parliament, he was identified as one of the referendum's leading organisers.
Sergey Tsekov
Crimea's vice speaker is accused of unlawfully dismissing the Crimea's legitimate government by the EU, along with Vladimir Konstantinov, who was threatened with dismissal. He was also said to be "one of the first Crimean leaders to ask in public for annexation of Crimea to Russia".
Those accused of publicly supporting the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine are: Viktor Ozerov, the chairman of Russia's security and defence committee; Vladimir Dzhabarov, the first deputy chairman of Russia's international affairs committee; and Evgeni Bushmin, the Russian parliament's deputy speaker.
Aleksandr Totoonov, a member of the Russian committee on culture, science, and information, and Oleg Panteleev, the country's first deputy chairman of the committee on parliamentary issues, are accused of the same by the EU.
Aleksandr Vitko
A vice-admiral and the commander of Russia's Black Sea fleet. He is identified as being responsible for "commanding Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory".
Anatoliy Sidorov and Aleksandr Galkin are both commanders of units deployed in Crimea. The EU said they are responsible for "part of the Russian military presence in Crimea which is undermining the sovereignty of the Ukraine and assisted the Crimean authorities in preventing public demonstrations against moves towards a referendum and incorporation into Russia".
Leonid Slutsky and Andrei Klishas were included on both the US and EU lists.