President has long had his eye on the most prestigious dacha in the former Soviet Union – now it could be his at last
When Russia annexed Crimea this month, it didn't just add 2 million people to its population and some disgruntled Ukrainian sailors to its navy. It may well have paved the way for Vladimir Putin to acquire the most prestigious dacha in the former Soviet Union.
The dacha complex in Yalta has long been the choice destination for Kremlin leaders to unwind. Stalin used to spend summer breaks strolling in the sprawling grounds of Yalta's Massandra Palace, now a museum and tourist attraction. And in 1991 it was in Crimea's Dacha No 3, in Foros Yalta, that the last Soviet president, Mikhail Gorbachev, was held under house arrest as his empire collapsed around him. Dacha No 1, also known as Wisteria, was owned by Nikita Khrushchev.
"You know the history of this place, and who it belongs to?" asked a security guard outside the gates to the property in 27-hectare grounds. Nestled in the forested mountains overlooking Yalta's Black Sea coast, the lavish holiday home, which includes indoor and outdoor pools and spa facilities, reportedly caught Putin's eye in 2003 when he visited the southern peninsula and declared his "love for this small corner of Russia".
Now, Crimea's new leaders are reportedly discussing the legal work needed to gift the property to their new president.
"This would complete the historical justice. Crimea returned to Russia and Putin returning to Russia's soul," said Mikhail, an ethnic Russian who owns a holiday apartment in one of the nearby blocks. "When Khrushchev gave away Crimea it was a terrible moment for all the Russians here, we have waited more than 60 years for this moment. It would be an honour to welcome the Russian president in Yalta."
Putin has tried to get his hands on the dacha once before. In 2005, just two years after he first declared his affections for Wisteria, the property mysteriously came into the ownership of the Russian bank VTB under the title of "the official residence of the president of Russia in Crimea".
To avoid seizures, sanctions and taxes, Russia's elite rarely purchase deluxe properties in their own names but prefer to use a complex system of backroom deals and the signatures of political patrons. So it was not surprising that the property deeds for Wisteria, under the supervision of Ukraine's notoriously corrupt leaders at the time – presidents Leonid Kuchma and twice-ousted Viktor Yanukovych – passed through the hands of several state department officials, including Igor Bakay, head of the garish but popular Soviet-era coastal children's summer camp Artek, before emerging in the Moscow-based VTB bank's inventory.
"It's well-known locally that Dacha No 1 belonged to Putin in everything but name," says Sergei Davydenko, a local business owner who witnessed the 2004 increase in security at the property that he used to sneak inside to play as a boy. "You would see helicopters coming down over the mountain and landing there."
But the Russian president's luxury holidays on Crimea's sprawling coastline were brought to an abrupt end in 2005 when the corrupt scheme was revealed in the aftermath of the Orange Revolution. Ukraine's then president, Viktor Yushchenko, consequently waged a bitter lawsuit with Moscow on behalf of his parliament. The property was eventually restored to the Ukrainian government at a cost of 12m hyrvnia (£641,000), a third of its estimated value.
But since Crimea's annexation, local people expect the transfer of the property to Putin to be little more than a formality. Last week Crimea's new prime minister, Sergei Aksyonov, announced that all the property formerly owned by the Ukrainian state would be nationalised.
"Putin has his second shot at the dacha, and the goal is wide open," said Maik Lvovskiy, an investigative journalist who followed the 2004 paper trail that led all the way from Yalta to Moscow. "If he pursued it before, then I can't see why he wouldn't take it now; there are absolutely no obstacles in his way at all. He can pretty much walk straight through the front door," Lvovskiy said.
This position was confirmed by Crimea's deputy minister of tourism, Igor Kotlyar, who is on an official visit to Moscow. "Everything belonging to the Ukrainian government now belongs to the Russian Federation," said Kotlyar, speaking by telephone. "That includes the state-owned dachas and resorts in Yalta."
The property is still officially owned by Artek, whose new chief executive, Igor Leli, was appointed a month ago after a purge of officials still loyal to Kiev. But Artek's spokesperson told the Guardian that "a sale to a private individual is possible and more information will be publicly available soon".
Wisteria's neighbours are delighted at the prospect of Putin taking his summer breaks on their doorsteps. "We will welcome our president with open arms," said Georgiy Zaporozhny, a clergyman sitting in the sun-drenched courtyard of the Russian Orthodox church next door to the grounds of Dacha No 1. "He has, thank God, saved us from this fascism that has impregnated Europe, and taken us finally back to the motherland. He is a hero of the people here."