Kiev turns into battleground as police and special forces are issued with combat weapons
Scores of people have been killed and many more injured in what has become the bloodiest day in modern Ukrainian history.
The violence started shortly before 9am when protesters armed with axes, knives, truncheons and corrugated iron shields advanced on to a bridge in the centre of the Ukranian capital and drove riot police back from Independence Square.
Within an hour, the area surrounding the Ukrania hotel, which had been under the control of riot police, fell to the protesters. The police lines dissolved as they were bussed away to be replaced by the feared "Berkut" special forces. Kiev soon became a battleground.
Anti-government protesters try to shelter behind their shields during clashes with police in the center of Kiev. Photograph: Sergei Supinsky/AFP/Getty Images
Dozens of people – some injured, some dying and some dead – were dragged away on planks of wood or makeshift stretchers. Others were simply dragged along the ground on their backs, still under fire. The lobby of the hotel transformed into a blood-smeared makeshift medical centre. Some youths had what appeared to be gunshot wounds.
Agence France-Presse estimated at least 60 people have been killed. "More than 60 protesters died today. They all have gunshot wounds," a co-ordinator for opposition medics EuroMaidan Medical Centre told AFP.
On Thursday afternoon, Ukraine's acting interior minister, Vitaly Zakharchenko, issued a statement confirming that police had been armed with combat weapons.
Olesya Zhukovskaya a medic and activist reportedly shot in Kiev.
"I signed an order and police have been given combat weapons, which will be used in accordance with the law," Zakharchenko said in a statement published on the ministry website. He urged protesters to hand in their weapons and opposition leaders to condemn radical actions.
An Associated Press reporter witnessed 21 bodies laid out on the edge of the sprawling protest encampment in central Kiev. One policeman was killed and 28 suffered gunshot wounds, spokesman Serhiy Burlakov told AP.
Protesters stand on barricades in Kiev. Photograph: Louisa Gouliamaki/AFP/Getty Images
Protesters were also seen leading policemen with hands held high around the sprawling protest camp in central Kiev. Ukraine's interior ministry said 67 police were captured. They were being held in Kiev's occupied city hall, an opposition lawmaker said.
With the bloodshed still underway, the EU prepared to impose sanctions on those responsible for the deadly violence and arms embargo on the country. These sanctions could be avoided if Viktor Yanukovych, the Ukrainian president, is prepared to bend towards the demands of the pro-European protesters.
"In light of the deteriorating situation, the EU [has decided] as a matter of urgency on targeted measures against those responsible for violence and use of excessive force," said a draft statement of the resolution obtained by Reuters.
Map of Kiev showing the site of the recent clashes. Photograph: /the Guardian
"At the same time, member states [have decided] to implement an arms embargo and ban on equipment used for internal repression."
The text added that the EU was "appalled and deeply dismayed by the deteriorating situation in Ukraine."
"Any further escalation, including the introduction of a state of emergency, or the use of the armed forces against protesters must be avoided," it said.
Protesters evacuate a wounded demonstrator from Independence square. Photograph: Louisa Gouliamaki/AFP/Getty Images
William Hague, the British foreign secretary, described the killing of protesters in Kiev as "utterly unacceptable and indefensible" as he arrived for the EU meeting.
In Tuesday's operations, riot police retook control of a large tract of the square for the first time, reducing the protest camp to damp smoking rubble and debris. But Thursday morning's violent counteroffensive reversed those police gains and expanded, for the present, the area of central Kiev under the opposition.
The escalation of violence, following the deaths of at least 26 on Tuesday in major clashes, coincided with the arrival in Kiev of the German, Polish, and French foreign ministers on a mediation mission which looked doomed to failure.
A wall of protesters during Wednesday's clashes. Photograph: Emeric Fohlen/NurPhoto/REX
Ahead of the EU mediation effort, Yanukovych called a truce in the standoff, a ceasefire that lasted about 12 hours only for the clashes to escalate.
Yanukovych's security service chiefs also announced they were launching a nationwide "anti-terrorist" campaign, though it was not clear what this meant or what it would entail.
The Russian prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, said on Thursday that Yanukovych should not be a "doormat", in what seemed the latest words from Moscow urging the authorities to crack down on the protests.
"We need partners who are in good shape and for the authorities that work in Ukraine to be legitimate and effective, so that people don't wipe their feet on them like a doormat," said Medvedev in televised remarks.
Protesters stand behind burning barricades during a face-off against police Photograph: Bulent Kilic/AFP/Getty Images
A senior parliamentary official from the opposition nationalist Svoboda or Freedom party, Ruslan Koshulansky, said: "They're shooting people with Kalashnikovs."
Svoboda figures prowled the upper floors of the hotel with pistols, saying they were looking for police snipers. Several snipers were seen behind sandbagged positions and on rooftops with automatic weapons.
Rioting youths set cars and lorries on fire and as the fires died down, they hacked the vehicles and hauled away the parts to erect new street barricades.
Konstantin, a Red Cross paramedic, said he had been working non-stop for 48 hours as he treated the wounded and sought to get ambulances to get the injured to hospitals.
Smoke rises above burning barricades as dawn breaks on Kiev's Independence Square on Thursday. Photograph: David Mdzinarishvili/Reuters
In the Olympic village in Sochi, Ukrainian athletes added black armbands to the Ukrainian flags hanging from their balconies, a day after the IOC told them they were not allowed to wear the armbands in competition.
Bogdana Matsotska, a Ukrainian skier, has left the Olympics in "solidarity" with Kiev's protesters. Bogdana's father said he and his daughter were both "extremely angry" Yanukovych.
The head of the Crimean parliament, Vladimir Konstantinov, told Interfax that if the situation continues to deteriorate, there is a possibility of the region separating from Ukraine. Crimea, with its largely ethnic-Russian population, is staunchly pro-Moscow.
"It's possible, if the country collapses," said Konstantinov, on the possibility of secession. "Everything is heading in that direction."