Getting other countries to do what you want is a basic aim of all governments and political leaders. In Brussels last week, Barack Obama suggested there were two ways to achieve it. One, which he favoured, employs diplomacy, persuasion, democratic accountability and other soft-power tools. The other, which he deplored, involves using "brute force". Russia stands accused by the White House of resorting to the latter in Ukraine. Russia replies angrily that the US has double standards. What were the invasions of Iraq and Kosovo, if not the arbitrary, unsanctioned use of military might? That was totally different, say the Americans.
The crux of this oversimplified debate is that agreement on when, how and why it is right for a country, or group of countries, or the "international community" to intervene in the affairs of a sovereign state is lacking. After the cold war, a loose consensus grew in western capitals around the idea of humanitarian intervention. Tony Blair, speaking in Chicago in 1999, revived the concept of the "just war". In a globalised, interconnected world, he argued, nations should abandon the outdated principle of non-interference. Combining self-interest and moral purpose, they had a duty to defend and uphold universal values, including human rights. "We are all internationalists now," he declared. The backdrop to the "Blair doctrine" was ethnic cleansing in Kosovo, but also the genocide that started 20 years ago in Rwanda, claiming up to a million lives. Former US president Bill Clinton and others in power at the time have since acknowledged that this slaughter could have been avoided and that military intervention would have been appropriate. As if learning this lesson, there followed, after Kosovo, relatively benign international interventions in East Timor and Sierra Leone. But then Blair, in collusion with George W Bush, wrecked his case, first in Afghanistan, then in Iraq.
As Hamid Karzai prepares to depart the presidency and Nato troops pack up their kit, Afghanistan's future is again shrouded in fearful uncertainty. Departing countries such as Britain must meanwhile confront the uncomfortable question: what did we achieve? Even more so than Afghanistan, the Iraq intervention ultimately failed to satisfy Blair's five Chicago criteria for justified military intervention – is there a good case?; has diplomacy failed?; will military action succeed?; are we prepared to stick it out?; and does it serve our national interest? The Iraq trauma shattered the already frail international consensus around humanitarian intervention. Its questionable legality and high human and financial cost undermined trust and alienated support. In the west, war-weariness and wariness took deep hold. Others, such as the Russians, drew cynical conclusions.
One consequence of Iraq has been the refusal by politicians and publics in the US and Britain to back intervention in Syria. In Syria, it might be persuasively argued, the case for forcibly halting President Bashar al-Assad's murderous war on his people, curbing dangerous region-wide destabilisation and preventing further radicalisation by hardline Islamists, is overwhelming. In Syria, each day, unnumbered innocents are killed, tortured, raped or maimed, as it were before our eyes. Yet our eyes are tight shut. In Egypt, too, where a military junta now repeats or surpasses the excesses of the Mubarak era, western intervention is not an issue, but that is because Washington much prefers Egypt's generals to the Muslim Brotherhood.
This lack of real or meaningful consensus, let alone a rulebook, on international intervention accounts in part for the uproar over Russia's supposedly "protective" actions towards ethnic Russians in Crimea. Twisting the UN-guaranteed right to self-determination, Vladimir Putin decided he could do whatever he liked, just as, he argues, the US has done. The impact on Ukraine apart, such behaviour undermines the UN security council, charter, and other treaty pillars of the international system. And it invites emulation. Is Crimea, for example, now a precedent justifying a future Chinese invasion of Taiwan?
All cases are different. But forging a new international consensus on the principles governing armed interventionism is an urgent challenge. As a starting point, the likely fulfilment of five criteria, significantly different from Blair's, should be considered. Those contemplating intervention must ask themselves: 1) Does such action have broad domestic and international support? 2) What exactly are its aims and are they realistic? 3) Is it legal? 4) Is it morally justified? And 5) How does it end?