An understanding between the two leaders could provide crucial support, and time, for Mrs. May and her negotiators as they tackle the complex task of extricating Britain from more than four decades of European integration.
Photo
Mrs. May stressed her determination not to rush into making a formal declaration of Britain’s departure that would start the clock ticking on a two-year negotiating deadline. In London, she had reiterated a pledge to reduce net migration — a key issue in last month’s “Brexit” referendum — promising to cut it to below 100,000 a year, though appearing to backtrack on a deadline for doing so.
In both capitals, Mrs. May showed few signs of being of being a novice, despite having been in the job for just one week. She seemed relatively at ease both in the rather sober and businesslike forum with Ms. Merkel, and in the rowdy atmosphere of Parliament during the question session for the prime minister.
Before she flew to Berlin, her office issued a statement saying that Britain was relinquishing its turn to hold the six-month rotating presidency of the Council of the European Union, where national governments meet, which was scheduled for the second half of next year. That move was almost inevitable, given the outcome of the referendum.
On Thursday, Mrs. May plans to meet in Paris with President François Hollande.
While Ms. Merkel was diplomatic on Wednesday, German and French politicians insist that Britain cannot keep access to the European Union’s single market without accepting the free movement of workers across frontiers — something that Mrs. May is under pressure at home to resist.
In the parliamentary session, Mrs. May refused to be drawn out on that issue, when asked by a veteran Conservative lawmaker, Edward Leigh, whether she was willing to “reject staying in the single regulated market and offering instead to our friends in Europe a free trade deal very much in their interests.” Mrs. May said she would take heed of calls to control free movement, but also aim to negotiate the “right deal and the best deal” over trade.
Confronting the leader of the opposition Labour Party, Jeremy Corbyn, Mrs. May struck a confident, sometimes acerbic, tone and likened him to an “unscrupulous boss,” suggesting that his top tier of lawmakers had to “double their workload” while he “exploits the rules to further his own career.”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Mr. Corbyn, who faces a leadership challenge from a Labour rival, Owen Smith, has been hit by the mass resignation of much of his senior team in Parliament, leading some of those who remain loyal to have more than one portfolio.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Mrs. May pointedly thanked Labour lawmakers who defied the views of Mr. Corbyn to vote alongside her on Monday to renew Britain’s Trident nuclear missile system.
She noted that she was the Conservative Party’s — and the nation’s — second female prime minister (the first was Margaret Thatcher), saying that she had “long heard the Labour Party asking what the Conservative Party does for women” before adding the answer: “It just keeps making us prime minister.”
Mr. Corbyn attacked what he described as failed Conservative economic policies that had made people poorer, prompting Mrs. May to respond: “He calls it austerity. I call it living within our means.”
Mrs. May, however, avoided one question from Mr. Corbyn, who asked her about past comments made by her foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, about President Obama’s “part-Kenyan” heritage.