Noting that the jobs data for May was disappointing, she nonetheless said that “it is important we don’t overblow the significance of single report.”
“If the slowdown is a reflection of weak growth earlier in the year, I’m hopeful we will see stronger job gains going forward,” she added.
Ms. Yellen called the possibility of a so-called Brexit “significant for the United Kingdom and Europe,” and said that if Britain left the European Union it could usher in a period of uncertainty and volatility “that could affect market conditions and the U.S. economic outlook.”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Late in the hearing, Ms. Yellen said that while the Fed was closely monitoring the Brexit vote and the possible consequences of a vote to leave, she was not offering advice on how to vote.
Although the decision “is a unique event that has no close parallel,” she said, the Fed “is not attempting to take a stand. I am not providing advice in that sense.”
Under questioning from Senator Bob Menendez, a New Jersey Democrat, Ms. Yellen took aim at a recent suggestion from Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, that one option in managing the federal debt might be to force investors to accept less than the face value of what the government owed.
So-called haircuts aren’t unusual for bondholders of troubled companies, or for businesses going through bankruptcy, like the ones Mr. Trump controlled as a businessman. But she made clear such a strategy could prove disastrous for the government and the economy alike.
“I feel the consequences for the United States and the global economy for defaulting on Treasury debt would be very severe,” she said, avoiding mentioning Mr. Trump by name. “At a minimum, it could result in much higher borrowing costs for U.S. households and businesses.”
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Despite the Fed’s first move to tighten monetary policy in a decade in December, interest rates remain extremely low by historical standards and not too far above the so-called zero-bound.
That kind of accommodation provides support for the economy, Ms. Yellen said, but it does rob the Fed of what she called a “tried and true” tool in the face of an economic shock: a rate cut to spur growth.
For now, though, Ms. Yellen saw little reason to fear an impending crisis and she dismissed fears among some on Wall Street that the Fed has contributed to imbalances in the markets. “I don’t see any evidence,” she said, “of those broad-based financial stability concerns.”
And for all her caution about the outlook for the economy, Ms. Yellen said she did not see a recession on the horizon.
“The odds of a recession are low,” she said. Even as the Fed chairwoman listed headwinds like a weak manufacturing sector, lower commodity prices and job losses in the energy sector, she said, “I remain quite optimistic.”
Recessions are usually preceded by the threat of rising inflation and tightening monetary policy, she said. “We don’t have any such conditions in play right now.”