But the political response was relatively muted, in deference to the shootings of police officers in Dallas. Both presidential candidates canceled campaign events, and the presumptive Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, tweeted that he had postponed a scheduled speech on economic opportunity.
At the moment, though, the Democrats are best poised to take advantage of the positive employment news.
Lynn Vavreck, a professor of political science at University of California, Los Angeles, said that when it came to presidential elections, the economic trend was more important than any particular number. “As long as it’s going in the right direction,” she said, “that’s a good sign for the incumbent party.”
Concerns persist about the vitality of the economic recovery, which reached the seven-year point this month. And perhaps nothing highlights the reality that every monthly jobs report provides only a fleeting and incomplete picture more than the giddy swing between May’s revised gain of 11,000 and June’s 287,000. (A strike by more than 35,000 Verizon workers had artificially held down May’s totals.)
Photo
Still, Friday’s report, showing the largest single monthly job expansion since October 2015, helped whisk away some of the cloudiest forecasts. The three-month average of monthly gains rose to 147,000, after taking into account the Labor Department’s revised estimates that showed 6,000 fewer jobs were created in April and May than previously reported. June’s figures will be subject to two more revisions.
“This report should ease any fears that a persistent slowdown or recession is coming soon in the U.S.,” said Dean Maki, chief economist at Point72 Asset Management. “The service sector is where the real strength is, with 256,000 hires. But the gains were widespread across sectors.”
Mr. Maki pointed out that the vigorous report was in line with several other encouraging signs. New claims for unemployment benefits have stayed at rock-bottom levels. Consumer spending is strong. The manufacturing and service industry indexes have jumped. And the number of unfilled jobs, 5.8 million in April, is at a record since the survey began.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Hillary Clinton, the Democratic standard-bearer, has emphasized the steady economic improvements during President Obama’s two terms and the steep decline in the jobless rate from the recession’s peak of 10 percent.
While acknowledging the economy “isn’t yet where we want it to be,” Mrs. Clinton has argued that the United States is “stronger and better positioned than anyone in the world.” She has endorsed a higher minimum wage, expanded paid leave, more money for job training and a multibillion-dollar infrastructure plan.
Many Americans, though, particularly those with fewer skills and less education, have yet to enjoy the recovery’s rewards. Their deep-rooted discontent with the economy has been repeatedly voiced by Mr. Trump, who has opposed what he calls “job killing” trade deals. He has promised to impose high tariffs as a way of reversing the decline in manufacturing jobs, and to deport immigrants.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
There are other weak spots. Republicans can point out that real median household income is lower than it was a decade ago. And a broader measure of unemployment that includes discouraged job seekers, as well as those who would prefer to work full time instead of part time, is still nearly twice the official jobless rate, despite ticking down to 9.6 percent in June.
The proportion of people employed or actively looking for work has also been dragging along at low levels, suggesting that more people would return to the work force if desirable jobs were available.
Tom Perez, the labor secretary, conceded there was “still a lot of work to do.”
Unemployment for African-Americans, for example, whose jobless rate is typically about twice that of white Americans, rose last month to 8.6 percent from 8.2 percent.