“It is true the British detest the dour bureaucrats sitting in Brussels, ruling over the E.U., but that is nothing compared to the widespread anger back then against the white man in India,” Mr. Baru said.
But still the British hung on to India, relinquishing it only after being substantially weakened during World War II. And they did so reluctantly, noted the historian Ramachandra Guha, with some British generals convinced that India would be unable to govern itself and beg the British to return.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: Asia Edition Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
British colonialism in India began with the East India Company, which brought trade and its own private army. The legacy of the company can be seen in independent India’s reservations about foreign corporations, which have been welcomed only in recent years.
“We were colonized by a multinational company, so we were suspicious of foreign capital,” Mr. Guha said.
India’s exit from the British Empire may offer lessons for the European Union on what to expect next, he said. In the years after Indian independence, other British colonies in Asia and Africa made similar demands. One by one, from Sri Lanka to Malaysia, and Nigeria to Kenya, former colonies won independence.
“India Brexited, and these guys said, ‘Why not us?’” Mr. Guha said.
Mr. Baru said, “Brexit could trigger the collapse of the E.U. in the same way the Indian exit triggered the collapse of colonialism.”
But pushing the British out also made India vulnerable to ruptures from within. As the Indian nationalist movement began lobbying for freedom from the British, the All-India Muslim League began clamoring for a portion of the newly independent India to be partitioned as a separate Muslim-majority country, Pakistan.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
“Brits, once you challenge the notion of being part of a larger whole, you leave yourself vulnerable to breaking yourselves up,” Mr. Gupta said. He wondered aloud how Britain would persuade Scotland to remain part of the United Kingdom when the Scots voted overwhelmingly to remain in the European Union.
India, with 29 states comprising different ethnicities and multiple languages, is as diverse as the European Union and more than twice as populous. Persuading people of the different regions to stay together was an enormous challenge accomplished by the first deputy prime minister of India, Vallabhbhai Patel.
Patel went to most of the self-governing princely states — then more than 500 in number — that had been released by the British and convinced almost all to join an independent India.
Both Britain and Europe need someone like Patel, Mr. Gupta said, “someone absolutely and totally committed and capable of convincing all of the remaining parts to stay together.”