Britain has voted to leave the European Union, a shocking development with profound implications for markets and economies around the world.
Here's what you need to know:
1) The results are in: After a long night of vote counting, the final results have been issued: 51.9% of voters chose to leave the EU, while 48.1% wanted to remain.
2) Markets are ugly: Stocks began falling globally almost as soon as the first polls came in. Britain's FTSE 100 shed 3.1%, led by a massive decline in bank shares. Europe suffered even deeper losses: France's stock market tanked 8% and Germany's fell almost 7%.
Britain is basically "on sale" as the pound plunged to almost $1.33, its lowest level in over 30 years.
In the U.S., the Dow dropped 611 points (3.4%) points, the biggest daily drop since late August when the world worried about China's slowdown. Brexit knocked out all of the gains for the year for U.S. investors.
3) A frantic search for safety: The price of gold spiked as investors poured money into perceived safe havens. Other popular places to stash money right now are U.S. Treasuries, the Japanese yen, the Swiss franc and even Bitcoin.
Related: Markets around the world are freaking out
4) Cameron out: Prime Minister David Cameron, who campaigned against an exit, has announced that he will resign. Without offering a detailed timetable, Cameron said a new leader would be installed by October.
5) Appeals for calm: The Bank of England is under immense pressure to keep markets and banks operating in an orderly manner. In a statement, the central bank said it would "take all necessary steps to meet its responsibilities for monetary and financial stability."
Officials and regulators in other countries around the world are also preparing for fallout. South Korea's government called an emergency meeting, while others have called press conferences or issued statements.
The U.S. Federal Reserve said it was standing by to help as necessary.
6) How did this happen? Cameron promised voters in 2013 that he would allow a referendum on whether Britain should remain in the European Union. At the time, the chance of exit appeared to be low. But the campaign -- which focused heavily on immigration and the economy -- revealed deep fissures in Britain along both political and geographic lines.
7) The big questions: Britain's decision to exit the EU has injected huge amounts of uncertainty into markets. At this point, investors have more questions than answers -- will the U.K. be able to negotiate new trade deals? How long will that take? Will global banks seek to move their operations out of London?
"The U.K. government has a moral but not a legal obligation to leave. The next steps will be dictated by politics, not law," wrote Simon Wells, HSBC's chief U.K. economist in a note Friday.
Related: Biggest losers: 'Brexit' is hitting these companies hardest
8) The big takeaway? This isn't a one-day event. The repercussions of the vote to leave are only just beginning, and it has the potential to upend Europe's established political order. Buckle up!London (CNN) As dawn broke over the UK Friday, Britons woke to the tremors of a political earthquake the likes of which most had never felt before.
After one of the bitterest political campaigns in recent UK history, voters backed a British exit -- a "Brexit" -- from the European Union, turning their back on decades of peaceful cooperation with neighbors across the English Channel in favor of isolationism.
Respected political commentators and regular Joes were quick to flag up the revolutionary mood as the country faced up to a stunned "morning after" that left many on social media, over breakfast tables and around office water coolers asking "WTF?"
"This is as close to a revolution as we've experienced in my lifetime. And it's only just begun," tweeted Westminster correspondent turned presenter Nick Robinson.
This is as close to a revolution as we've experienced in my lifetime. And it's only just begun #EUref
Brace yourself for political and financial tumult like little we have ever witnessed. Expect Bank of England to step in
The referendum was the climax of months of angry posturing over its future inside or outside of the EU. Arguments became increasingly heated in the weeks leading up to the vote as the "Leave" and "Remain" teams traded barbs about immigration and racism, wealth and privilege.
News of the "Vote Leave" win was greeted with jubilation by those who have fought long and hard for a rethink of Britain's links to the current 28 member bloc, and who argued it was time to "take back control" from the bureaucrats in Brussels.
Addressing "Leave" supporters at a results party in London as UK broadcasters began to call the referendum results in their favor, UK Independence Party (UKIP) leader Nigel Farage said the country was marking its "Independence Day."
JUST WATCHED Nigel Farage: This will be a victory for real people Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Nigel Farage: This will be a victory for real people 02:25
"Ladies and gentlemen, dare to dream that the dawn is breaking on an independent United Kingdom," he said. "I hope this victory brings down this failed project ... Let's get rid of ... Brussels and all that has gone wrong. Let June 23 go down in history as our Independence Day."
But for those who had campaigned in favor of remaining in the EU, the referendum result -- which the "Leave" campaign won by a narrow -- but wider than predicted -- majority was a profound shock.
Green MP Caroline Lucas tweeted that the verdict was "devastating" and a "massive wake-up call to Westminster," urging all concerned to "find ways to heal our broken democracy."
For some there was genuine fear over what the final tally said about Britain in 2016, and about the country's apparent decision to close its doors to anyone it considers "outsiders."
Historian Simon Schama described the results as a "catastrophe," and warned of bleak times ahead if the UK does formally split from the EU.
JUST WATCHED Historian: Hatred of immigrants drives leave campaign Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Historian: Hatred of immigrants drives leave campaign 00:46
"It's a catastrophe ... for Europe," he told CNN. "We're on a very dangerous knife edge about the integrity and coherence of Europe.
"[We're] at one of those moments, my historian's nose tells me, [that] if this result stays and Britain does leave the union we're entering a very dark and exceptionally dangerous period in European and world history too."
For others, there was concern over what it is likely to mean for the country's future.
"I think people are going to wake up and think 'Oh my god, what's happening now?'" said Alastair Campbell, former communications adviser to Tony Blair. "There are so many unknowns."
The final results map highlights a telling split between London and the rest of England and Wales.
That gap was also apparent during the referendum campaign, with members of the "Leave" team accusing the capital's "elite" of being out of touch with what Nigel Farage called "real people ... ordinary people ... decent people."
Faced with an ever growing list of prominent personalities, captains of industry, world leaders and famous figures backing the "Remain" cause, Conservative MP Michael Gove, seen as the brains behind the "Vote Leave" campaign, told Sky News: " I think people in this country have had enough of experts ."
JUST WATCHED The UK votes to leave the EU in 90 seconds Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH The UK votes to leave the EU in 90 seconds 01:32
"London is a very distant place, a different country at times," Blackpool North MP Paul Maynard told CNN before the referendum, warning that voters' feelings of disempowerment was likely to impact on the result. "If supposedly 'important' people in London are telling them to do something, it may make them do the opposite."
The seismic difference of opinion between voters in England and Wales and those in Scotland and Northern Ireland has led to concerns that the United Kingdom may not be "united" for very much longer.
"If this result holds, it's the end of Britain, it's as simple as that," said Simon Schama.
Scotland wants to stay
Scotland voted overwhelmingly in favor of staying in the EU, leading to calls for a second referendum on Scottish independence to allow Scots to "remain" even if the rest of the nation leaves.
"Scotland is voting overwhelming to stay; if Scotland cannot be coerced into leaving the EU against its will, you cannot in all decency deny them a second referendum," Schama said.
JUST WATCHED British PM: Economy is fundamentally strong Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH British PM: Economy is fundamentally strong 03:57
"If all the leavers are about self-government, and taking back control, why shouldn't Scotland take back control?"
In Northern Ireland, which also voted to "remain" in the EU, the Brexit vote may also have a lasting impact, with some suggesting it may lead to Irish unification.
Before the referendum, Sinn Fein's Martin McGuinness, deputy first minister of Northern Ireland, told the Guardian newspaper there was a "democratic imperative" to allow voters in the region to vote on a united Ireland.
Throughout the campaign, the "Stronger In" team frequently played up the fact that walking out on the EU meant taking a step into the dark.London (CNN) Shortly after 5 a.m. in the northwest London suburb of Harlesden, Toni Carlton rolled over in bed, picked up her cell phone and checked its news feed.
And nearly burst into tears.
"It felt like the world was ending right there," said the 41-year-old childminder. "It sounds dramatic, but I just felt like burying my head in the pillow and screaming."
She wasn't alone.
Across the UK, many people were waking up Friday to what they've spent the past few months dreading -- a leap into the unknown.
The country voted to end its decades-long membership in the European Union, plunging headlong into political, economic and social uncertainty.
But while anger was erupting in bedrooms and, in London at least, on the streets, there were also scenes of joy.
In a country bitterly divided, the many millions who voted for independence from what they considered an outmoded and overbearing bureaucracy were punching the air in triumph and singing in jubilation.
Or, at the very least, affording themselves a smile.
Passionate campaigning
"I'm ecstatic," said Darren Grimes, a 22-year-old from the coastal city of Brighton who had campaigned for Britain's exit -- or Brexit -- from Europe. "You can't even begin to imagine how I feel."
That emotions were running so strongly in the wake of the national 52% to 48% Brexit victory shouldn't come as a surprise.
Passionate campaigning for the vote on both sides has seen tempers boil over with rivals accusing each other of peddling lies, hatred and distrust in pursuit of political gain.
Cities, towns, households and even families have been divided by claim and counterclaim over how EU membership affects thorny issues such as immigration and healthcare.
And as the results rolled in through the small hours of Friday morning, those divisions were also exposed along geological fault lines as areas such as London and Scotland voted for the Europe that much of the rest of the country wanted to leave behind.
'Sad and frightened'
In the capital, a city built on immigration, the disappointment was palpable. Voices on the streets talked of "craziness," "shock," and even "embarrassment" at the outcome.
"I'm terrified for the future," said Carrie Dunn, 36. "I truly and honestly believe that unity and friendship are the way forward for all of us, and fear this choice will plunge us into isolationism.
"I believe this is probably the end of the United Kingdom as we know it. I'm sad and frightened."
Despair over the vote turned into angry scenes at one point in the capital as jeering crowds of protesters gathered outside the home of pro-Brexit politician Boris Johnson, swarming his car as he left to deliver a speech about his side's victory.
Beyond the capital, there were other displays of anguish, particularly in places that may struggle if migrant EU workers are required to leave.
The St. Giles Cafe in the university city of Oxford, where 70% voted in favor of remaining in the EU, was photographed Friday morning with messages from its owners daubed on the window.
"No EU, no cafe," they read. "Closed in protest of EU vote."
"My sense is that most folks in Oxford are surprised this morning," Kathleen Lawton-Trask, an American who says she's lived in the city for almost five years, wrote on Instagram.
Local cafe shut in protest of #Brexit #oxford #noEUnoCafe A photo posted by knitlikeyoumeanit (@knitlikeyoumeanit) on Jun 24, 2016 at 6:03am PDT
'Whirlwind of emotions'
Expats from EU countries living in the UK spoke of their fears for the future.
"When I heard the news this morning, I was overwhelmed by a whirlwind of emotions," said Mia Hasenson-Gross, a Finnish woman who has lived in London for more than 12 years.
"I was in disbelief, I thought this can't be true, there must be a mistake and urged my husband to check again.
"When he confirmed it was true, the next feeling to kick in was confusion -- so what does that mean for me? An EU national who has lived here for the last 12.5 years, built a home and raised a family, established myself as a member of my community."
In the northern city of York, Abbey Urbanski, an English woman married to a Polish citizen, said the result had left her "pretty numb all morning and at a loss as to what the future hold for our little family unit."
Others described being swept up with negative emotion despite having voted in favor of Brexit.
'Reality sinks in'
Mandy Suthi, a London student, said she wanted to vote again to reverse her earlier decision.
"This morning the reality was actually sinking in," she told CNN affiliate ITN. "My family, this morning, even though the majority of us voted to leave, we actually regret it today."
Despite winning more than half of votes, public signs of jubilation for the Brexit camp were largely muted, although the delight was keenly felt by many.
In Darlington, northeast England, where 71% voted to leave the EU, the early morning verdict was greeted politely by anti-Europe campaigners.
"The leave campaigners were smiling and shaking hands in the run up to the announcement," said Charlotte Bowe, a reporter with the local Northern Echo newspaper who was covering the count. "They were thrilled and very happy."
'Just another day'
"I spoke to one gentleman who had been campaigning for 20 years, who was very, very pleased. The remain supporters left the area pretty quickly."
But on the streets of Darlington on Friday it was "just another day," she said.
Brian Rush, a local leader of the anti-EU UKIP party in the eastern English market town of Boston -- where 75.5% voted to leave -- also described low-key celebrations.
"I'm a little bit tired, but we're so overwhelmed at the support," he said. "There's certainly lots of smiling faces here now."
But in one corner of the country, later on Friday, there will at least be singing.
"How am I celebrating?" said Brexit campaigner Grimes. "This evening, we're going to karaoke."Frida Ghitis is a world affairs columnist for The Miami Herald and World Politics Review, and a former CNN producer and correspondent. Follow her @FridaGhitis . The opinions expressed in this commentary are hers.
Amsterdam, Netherlands (CNN) Moments after the startling results of Britain's vote to leave the European Union emerged, anti-immigrant crusaders in other parts of Europe gave notice they, too, would try to get their countries to leave.
Here in the Netherlands, populist politician Geert Wilders unleashed a Twitter storm of jubilation, declaring, "And the Netherlands will be next!" His French counterpart, Marine Le Pen, said she and her far-right National Front would try to organize a "Frexit," a referendum to take France out of the EU.
The calls for Frexit or for a "Nexit," as the nascent campaign to pull out the Netherlands is called, are a clear sign that the EU -- one of the mainstays of global stability after World War II -- may start to unravel altogether.
While much of the initial focus of the "Brexit" vote has turned to financial markets, which opened in a state of panic Friday, they are only the first and most tangible sign of the powerful impact of the vote.
A more subtle and important consequence of a weakened, and perhaps ultimately defunct EU, is what it could do to democracy, human rights and the rule of law beyond its own borders.
For decades, a dazzling achievement of the EU has been its ability to attract other counties to its model. Former Communist bloc nations have aspired to become part of Europe. The EU gave them a road map. It is a road map that, if followed by all countries, would increase peace, stability and well-being across the globe.
To join, EU hopefuls must satisfy the so-called Copenhagen criteria. The first, the one that must be met before a country is officially considered a candidate, is "(s)tability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human rights and respect for the protection of minorities."
With that clause, the EU exerted an outsize positive influence across the entire European continent. Impoverished nations dreaming of joining the union found it necessary to improve the way they dispensed justice; they worked to fight against prejudice; they at least tried to improve their treatment of religious, ethnic and even gender-identity minorities.
JUST WATCHED Bank stocks crushed on Brexit vote Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Bank stocks crushed on Brexit vote 01:09
While the citizens of comparatively rich Western European countries have been pondering whether or not to stay in the EU, countries to the East have been dreaming of joining, and working to meet the requirements. A couple of months ago, during a trip to Albania, I was startled to discover the country has a full ministry, the Ministry of European Integration, dedicated to the task of fulfilling Europe's membership requirements.
Obviously, would-be EU members are enticed more than anything by the economic benefits of membership, but the EU beckons as something more than a prosperity club. It is a club of freedom, of good governance, of opportunity and respect for individuals.
Is it flawed? No doubt. There are reasons why so many want to leave. A recent poll found 47% of people in key European countries have unfavorable views of the EU. Concerns about having to obey Brussels' bureaucratic rules have simmered for years, but they heated up after the Greek bailout and boiled over with the current refugee crisis.
The champions of European integration seem to have rejected the notion that citizens of individual countries value their national identity and prize their ability to chart their own course. At the very least, EU leaders need to trim the union's sails, reduce their ambitions and backtrack; move closer to the original idea of creating an economic union, while holding fast to requirements that allow only true democracies to join.
JUST WATCHED Tony Blair on how Brexit happened and U.S. relations Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Tony Blair on how Brexit happened and U.S. relations 01:39
What happened in Britain and is now inspiring anti-Europe activists elsewhere would have been troubling at any time. But it is much more distressing -- and dangerous -- now.
It is no coincidence that the forces tearing apart the European Union are gaining strength even as we are seeing an alarming rise in nationalism, nativism and autocracy. This is occurring in an environment that has brought us smooth-talking demagogues exploiting people's fears and prejudices . It is precisely the moment when the values that the EU promotes are most needed, but it is also, not surprisingly, when they are most sharply under attack.
The British decision weakens Western unity. It is a moment of triumph for autocratic leaders such as Russian President Vladimir Putin, who is watching his foes -- the democratic countries that imposed sanctions against Russia after he attacked Ukraine -- fight amongst themselves. And let's remember, Putin went after Ukraine for one specific reason: to keep it from drawing closer to the EU.
If the EU unravels, it will be a slow, dispiriting process. We should hope for good leadership, particularly in the United States, to save the Western alliance and its economic, political and moral appeal.
JUST WATCHED On historic day, Trump hard-sells new golf course Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH On historic day, Trump hard-sells new golf course 01:38
Will the Netherlands leave? While economic and political leaders here say it would be a mistake and call the Brexit vote "a major blow, an earthquake," a Dutch exit from Europe is quite conceivable.
Much like other right-wing politicians, Wilders was once a fringe figure. But that has changed. His Party for Freedom leads in the polls. Elections are scheduled for March, and after Thursday's vote in Britain, "Nexit" becomes a top issue for the campaign.
After the vote results. European Council President Donald Tusk mused , "I always remember what my father used to tell me: What doesn't kill you makes you stronger." The Brexit vote may well end up killing the EU.
If European leaders display uncanny wisdom, maybe, just maybe, it will ultimately make the EU stronger. But at the risk of disagreeing with Tusk's father, the vote is more likely to weaken the European Union, strengthen its foes and undermine the quality of democracy across the European continent.For “Leave” voters, the calculus is almost precisely the opposite. In other words, this isn’t just a split over what the effects of Brexit will be. Rather, the divide is over what is important — and the two sides of the debate prioritize totally different things.
A generational split is about more than age
Age Gap Younger voters want to stay in the European Union; older voters want to leave. Voters age 18 to 34 Voters age 35 to 54 Voters 55 and older Remain Leave 52 31 Remain Leave 40 38 Remain Leave 27 29 Voters age 18 to 34 Voters age 35 to 54 Voters 55 and older Remain Leave 52% 31% Remain Leave 40% 38% Remain Leave 27% 29%
This second chart, showing the age split between “Leave” and “Remain” backers, helps explain why the two sides have such starkly different priorities.
The split isn’t just about divergent generational attitudes; different age groups have different stakes in the economy.
Older voters are more likely to be retired and on a pension or other fixed income. That could mean they feel insulated from any short-term economic downturns caused by a Brexit — and that they don’t expect to share in future economic gains from staying. Younger voters have more to gain and lose from the economy’s performance — and from being able to freely work across Europe.
Photo
The age gap may also be connected to differing views of immigration, which in turn may be linked to geography. Anti-immigrant sentiment is often highest in towns with few immigrants — places where the problem isn’t foreigners competing with natives for jobs, but the absence of economic opportunities over all.
Opposition to immigration has become an indirect way to express anxiety over the changes globalization has brought to Britain, said Alexandra Cirone, a fellow at the London School of Economics.
“Framing this globalization problem as immigration,” she said, “can tug on the heartstrings of potential voters, regardless of the actual facts.”
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
In recent decades, Britain’s economy has shifted away from industry and manufacturing and toward services. That means many older Britons who once worked in factories or mines have seen their former employers shuttered and their communities become poorer, even as the country as a whole has become wealthier. They have also seen their towns wither as their children move to cities to find jobs.
To people outside those communities, Britain today is a wealthy country, with low unemployment and vibrant cities, a place where young people have plentiful and exciting opportunities. But in the areas hit hardest by economic change, all that success feels like a shift away from a comfortable past and toward a frightening future.
For voters who feel left behind by globalization and the rapid social changes that have come with it, a vote to leave the European Union can feel like a vote to restore Britain to its former greatness.
“Britain was a world power. They had an empire,” said Terrence Peterson, a fellow at Stanford University’s Center for International Security and Cooperation. A vote to leave the bloc, therefore, can feel like vote to return to Britain as it once was.
Financial markets have been shaken