Tokyo has now sanctioned 72 organizations and 81 individuals for their dealings with North Korea.
JUST WATCHED How much damage can North Korea's weapons do? Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH How much damage can North Korea's weapons do? 01:04
These so-called "secondary sanctions," punishing those who do business with North Korea, come on the heels of similar measures levied by the US Treasury Department against Russian and Chinese entities for their dealings with North Korea on Wednesday
The United States has hoped to marshal a global coalition to isolate North Korea as part of its so-called "peaceful pressure" campaign. The hope is to put enough diplomatic and financial pressure on North Korea to bring it to the negotiating table.
North Korea uses the money for a host of purposes, from funding the lavish lifestyles of the country's elites to its weapons programs.
JUST WATCHED What Trump has said about North Korea Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH What Trump has said about North Korea 02:05
North Korea's 2015 imports Source: Observatory of Economic Complexity
“What is the UK doing? What we’re doing is working with our international partners,” she said. “We want to continue to bring pressure on North Korea to ensure that they desist this action. And we see that the best way of doing is for China to be bringing pressure to bear on North Korea.”
Pyongyang, North Korea (CNN) The crowd applauded as the official announcement was read out.
“The Japanese government is adding to the anxiety over North Korean missiles, and that creates an atmosphere in which Korea-bashing is acceptable. North Korea is seen as the enemy and so, by extension, are people in Japan with North Korean roots.”
-- Trump took to Twitter after the announcement and said North Korea's "words and actions continue to be very hostile and dangerous to the United States." He added that Pyongyang has become a "great threat and embarrassment to China, which is trying to help but with little success"; warned South Korea their "talk of appeasement with North Korea will not work"; and said Washington is considering "stopping all trade with any country doing business with North Korea."
There are clear divisions in South Korea about how to deter the North.
"There are deep fractures in South Korea and a lot of ways that North Korea could manipulate that," he said.
Donald Trump’s offer to allow Japan and South Korea to buy “highly sophisticated military equipment” from the US has triggered speculation that Washington might be on the point of relaxing some of the few remaining restrictions on arms sales in the region, in the wake of North Korea’s sixth nuclear test.
Mr. Moon himself has been a proponent of dialogue with North Korea. But as North Korea has escalated tensions recently with a series of missile tests, he has pushed for tougher new sanctions, hoping that they would force the North to return to the negotiating table.
“If North Korea does not stop provocations, the situation could become uncontrollable,” Mr. Moon said at the start of his meeting with Mr. Putin.
