Against that backdrop, banks globally hoarded cash and became highly reluctant to lend to anyone. It was a modern version of a bank run.
There are few signs any of that is happening in response to Brexit. European bank stocks have fallen sharply since the June 23 vote. They’ve actually fallen by a larger percentage than during the first three trading days after the Lehman declaration. But nothing in the bank lending markets suggests widespread panic.
In the three trading days after the Lehman bankruptcy announcement, the premium banks charged to lend to one another in dollars rose by about half a percentage point. A comparable measure of the health of the British banking system has risen only 0.08 percent since Brexit, and actually was down Tuesday. The spread has risen even less in euro-denominated bank lending.
That’s good news. It suggests investors think that profits by banks will get hammered by Brexit — but not that this will endanger their very solvency.
The Lehman Collapse Strained Banks More Than Brexit Did In the days after the 2008 Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, bank lending was disrupted much more than it has been in the wake of Britain’s vote to leave the European Union. Market premium for short-term bank lending 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0 Lehman Brexit -20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 ← Days before event | Days after event → Market premium for short-term bank lending 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0 Lehman Brexit -20 -10 0 10 ← Days before event | Days after event →
Banks may be facing huge costs as they weigh whether to relocate operations from London to continental Europe. Investors will find uncertainty around their businesses and leaner profits as central banks potentially cut interest rates further. But collectively, it appears that investors believe that banks will weather the storm, or at least that governments won’t let them fail.
So the mechanisms of financial contagion that turned the collapse of the fourth-largest American investment bank into a global crisis just don’t seem to be gearing up. And that is reflected even in the most widely followed markets. Yes, the British pound is down sharply on currency markets. But the Standard & Poor’s 500 stock index is down only 4.5 percent, and is still above its levels from as recently as March.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
But if financial contagion doesn’t appear to be a grave threat, political contagion does.
The modern global economy is built on the notion of a free flow of trade, capital and people among the major advanced nations of Europe, North America and Asia. The European Union has been a key vehicle through which that modern order has evolved.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Britain’s E.U. exit won’t by itself change that, and even British advocates of leaving the trading bloc say that they want continued good relations, trade and otherwise, with Europe. Things might work out just fine, with perhaps a more inward-focused Britain but no other major changes to this global financial and economic order.
But if this is just a first step toward raising much higher walls between the major powers of Europe — if countries like France, Spain, Italy and even Germany retreat inward and build distrust that rips at that order?
It will make Lehman seem like a historical asterisk.
In September 2008, no one predicted that the Lehman bankruptcy could lead to a Greek sovereign debt crisis that would halt half a century of progress toward European unity. The risk with Brexit is, similarly, not in the consequences we know, but in the ones that we don’t know.