“Almost all participants judged that the surprisingly weak May employment report increased their uncertainty about the outlook for the labor market,” the account said.
The vote to do nothing at the June meeting was unanimous — a first for the Fed since January — but differences persisted over how long the Fed should wait. Some officials continued to argue for raising rates soon, while others saw little reason for urgency.
Those in favor of moving argued that unemployment and inflation were close to levels the Fed regarded as healthy, and waiting could cause the economy to overheat. In their view, the minutes said, “taking another step in removing monetary accommodation should not be delayed too long.”
Stanley Fischer, the Fed’s vice chairman, said last week on the business cable news network CNBC that there was still reason for optimism about the economic outlook. “First of all, the U.S. economy since the very bad data we got in May on employment has done pretty well,” he said. “Most of the incoming data looked good.”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Others, however, were inclined to leave rates near zero for some time. These officials, the account said, “underscored they would need to accumulate sufficient evidence to increase their confidence that economic growth was strong enough to withstand a possible downward shock to demand.”
James Bullard, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, announced after the June meeting that he now expected that the Fed should keep rates near the current low level through 2018.
Rob Martin, an economist at Barclays, said the debate would be decided by job growth in the coming months. The government will release its June employment report on Friday.
“If employment growth picks up this summer, members will become more optimistic over the outlook for activity,” Mr. Martin wrote on Wednesday, after the release of the meeting minutes. “Likewise, if employment growth disappoints over the summer, even the most hawkish member will begin to revise its outlook lower and no member would push hard for a September rate hike.”
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Since the financial crisis, inflation has consistently failed to reach the 2 percent annual pace the Fed regards as healthy. Inflation expectations have declined sharply. And, as inflation sags in other developed nations, some economists warn that central banks are not doing enough. But the Fed remains officially sanguine. The account said most officials expected faster inflation in coming years.
The global economy also remains a concern. The June minutes said that officials saw signs of improvement — but that was before the British vote. There is general agreement that Britain’s exit from the European Union will drag on growth, but the magnitude remains unclear.
In the short term, that is another reason for the Fed to delay any rate increases.
“We are still evaluating it,” Mr. Fischer said on Friday. “My guess is that it will be less important for the U.S. than the countries directly involved — almost just logically so. We will wait and see.”