Complicating matters was the fact that the crime of rebellion does not have an exact equivalent under Belgian law. But it was important to keep “unity” in the legal proceedings to avoid leaving those who stayed at a disadvantage compared with “the fugitives,” the judge said.
The judge also noted that Mr. Puigdemont had in any case indicated that he planned at some stage to return to Spain. There is little doubt that if he does, Spanish authorities will prosecute Mr. Puidgemont for a full range of offenses.
Jaume Alonso-Cuevillas, a Spanish lawyer representing Mr. Puigdemont, told local media on Tuesday that it was “obvious” that Mr. Puigdemont would face immediate arrest if he returned.
Nonetheless, Mr. Puigdemont’s lawyer argued that the withdrawal of the arrest was meant to allow Spain to avoid “a huge slap in the face if the judiciary of another European country had said that Spain’s judiciary doesn’t guarantee a fair trial.”
The Spanish judge’s announcement came a day after a Belgian judge postponed, for a second time, a ruling on whether to honor the warrant request.
Tuesday’s decision allows Mr. Puigdemont and the four other Catalan politicians to remain in Belgium, although Ine van Wymersch, a spokeswoman for the Brussels prosecutor’s office, emphasized that the case presented the office with an “unprecedented situation.”
Pending a formal closure of the Belgian case, the prosecutor’s office later said that it was clear that “the ongoing procedure has no subject anymore,” after also consulting with Eurojust, a European Union agency that deals with judicial cooperation.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Mr. Puigdemont and other separatists are waging a high-stakes battle with the Spanish government over independence, touched off by an Oct. 1 referendum that the Spanish government says should never have taken place because it violated Spain’s Constitution.
Immediately after a declaration of independence by separatist lawmakers in the Catalan parliament, Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of Spain invoked emergency powers, removed Mr. Puigdemont and his government, and called for elections on Dec. 21 for a new regional parliament in Catalonia, in the hope that voters would replace the separatists.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Mr. Puigdemont was hoping to run for re-election from Brussels, and he is still expected to campaign from there. Judge Llarena’s decision on Tuesday left it up to Mr. Puigdemont to choose whether and when to return to Spain.
The judge’s decision came a day after ordering that four separatist leaders, including Oriol Junqueras, the ousted deputy leader of Catalonia, be kept in jail.
Six other former members of the Catalan government were released, however, after each posting bail of 100,000 euros, or about $120,000, and pending a full trial.
Mr. Puigdemont said that he and other former cabinet members had traveled to Belgium in late October because they felt they would not receive a fair trial in Spain, but that they were not seeking asylum.
“We are here because Brussels is the capital of Europe — it is not a question of Belgian politics,” he said after arriving. “This is a European issue, and I want Europe to react.”
His Belgian lawyer said last weekend that Mr. Puigdemont and the four former Catalan ministers intended to stay in Belgium until after the elections, and possibly beyond that.
Since his arrival in Belgium one month ago, Mr. Puigdemont has held a few campaign events, at one point inviting more than 500 Catalan mayors. He is expected to rally 20,000 Catalans in Brussels on Thursday, according to officials.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
European leaders, however, have been largely unsympathetic to the Catalan push for independence, and Belgian leaders did not exactly welcome the separatists with open arms.
The presence of Mr. Puigdemont created a political problem for Prime Minister Charles Michel of Belgium, who wants to maintain good relations with Spain but must also be mindful of the Flemish separatist party that is part of his governing coalition.
The idea of asylum for the Catalan separatists “is absolutely not on the agenda,” Mr. Michel said last month, though a decision on whether to honor the arrest warrant ultimately rested with Belgium’s courts.