Kiev turns into battleground as police and special forces are issued with combat weapons
Acting President Turchinov said Sunday that Ukraine is ready to talk to Kremlin to try to improve relations, but made clear that Kiev's return to European integration would be a priority.
Within an hour, the area surrounding the Ukrania hotel, which had been under the control of riot police, fell to the protesters. The police lines dissolved as they were bussed away to be replaced by the feared "Berkut" special forces. Kiev soon became a battleground.
Anti-government protesters try to shelter behind their shields during clashes with police in the center of Kiev. Photograph: Sergei Supinsky/AFP/Getty Images
On Thursday afternoon, Ukraine's acting interior minister, Vitaly Zakharchenko, issued a statement confirming that police had been armed with combat weapons.
Olesya Zhukovskaya a medic and activist reportedly shot in Kiev.
"I signed an order and police have been given combat weapons, which will be used in accordance with the law," Zakharchenko said in a statement published on the ministry website. He urged protesters to hand in their weapons and opposition leaders to condemn radical actions.
An Associated Press reporter witnessed 21 bodies laid out on the edge of the sprawling protest encampment in central Kiev. One policeman was killed and 28 suffered gunshot wounds, spokesman Serhiy Burlakov told AP.
Protesters stand on barricades in Kiev. Photograph: Louisa Gouliamaki/AFP/Getty Images
Protesters were also seen leading policemen with hands held high around the sprawling protest camp in central Kiev. Ukraine's interior ministry said 67 police were captured. They were being held in Kiev's occupied city hall, an opposition lawmaker said.
With the bloodshed still underway, the EU prepared to impose sanctions on those responsible for the deadly violence and arms embargo on the country. These sanctions could be avoided if Viktor Yanukovych, the Ukrainian president, is prepared to bend towards the demands of the pro-European protesters.
"In light of the deteriorating situation, the EU [has decided] as a matter of urgency on targeted measures against those responsible for violence and use of excessive force," said a draft statement of the resolution obtained by Reuters.
Map of Kiev showing the site of the recent clashes. Photograph: /the Guardian
The text added that the EU was "appalled and deeply dismayed by the deteriorating situation in Ukraine."
"Any further escalation, including the introduction of a state of emergency, or the use of the armed forces against protesters must be avoided," it said.
William Hague, the British foreign secretary, described the killing of protesters in Kiev as "utterly unacceptable and indefensible" as he arrived for the EU meeting.
In Tuesday's operations, riot police retook control of a large tract of the square for the first time, reducing the protest camp to damp smoking rubble and debris. But Thursday morning's violent counteroffensive reversed those police gains and expanded, for the present, the area of central Kiev under the opposition.
The escalation of violence, following the deaths of at least 26 on Tuesday in major clashes, coincided with the arrival in Kiev of the German, Polish, and French foreign ministers on a mediation mission which looked doomed to failure.
Yanukovych's security service chiefs also announced they were launching a nationwide "anti-terrorist" campaign, though it was not clear what this meant or what it would entail.
The Russian prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, said on Thursday that Yanukovych should not be a "doormat", in what seemed the latest words from Moscow urging the authorities to crack down on the protests.
"We need partners who are in good shape and for the authorities that work in Ukraine to be legitimate and effective, so that people don't wipe their feet on them like a doormat," said Medvedev in televised remarks.
A senior parliamentary official from the opposition nationalist Svoboda or Freedom party, Ruslan Koshulansky, said: "They're shooting people with Kalashnikovs."
Svoboda figures prowled the upper floors of the hotel with pistols, saying they were looking for police snipers. Several snipers were seen behind sandbagged positions and on rooftops with automatic weapons.
Konstantin, a Red Cross paramedic, said he had been working non-stop for 48 hours as he treated the wounded and sought to get ambulances to get the injured to hospitals.
Smoke rises above burning barricades as dawn breaks on Kiev's Independence Square on Thursday. Photograph: David Mdzinarishvili/Reuters
Bogdana Matsotska, a Ukrainian skier, has left the Olympics in "solidarity" with Kiev's protesters. Bogdana's father said he and his daughter were both "extremely angry" Yanukovych.
The head of the Crimean parliament, Vladimir Konstantinov, told Interfax that if the situation continues to deteriorate, there is a possibility of the region separating from Ukraine. Crimea, with its largely ethnic-Russian population, is staunchly pro-Moscow.
"It's possible, if the country collapses," said Konstantinov, on the possibility of secession. "Everything is heading in that direction."Mrs. Yanukovych is said to have retreated to Donetsk, where local journalists working for Donskiye Novosti said she and the president’s son, Oleksandr, who is said to have amassed a fortune during his father’s rule, had been among the residents of a complex surrounded by a 12-foot wall on the city outskirts.
He said he had finally decided to call it quits on Tuesday, and now hoped to get work in Russia. Crimea, which Russia transferred to Ukraine in 1954, is still almost entirely Russian-speaking and home to the headquarters of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet. It voted overwhelmingly for Mr. Yanukovych in 2010 — he received 84 percent of the vote against Yulia V. Tymoshenko, the former prime minister — embracing him as a strong and reliable leader who would hold the forces of Ukrainian nationalism at bay and strengthen ties with Moscow. Most residents cheered in November when Mr. Yanukovych rejected a trade deal with the European Union and turned to Moscow instead.
According to RIA Novosti, anonymous government sources said Thursday that Yanukovych was in Russia and that Russian authorities have accepted his request for security. A warrant has been issued for his arrest in Ukraine.
U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry said he spoke with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov on Friday morning about the airport and military activities, and Lavrov told Kerry that the Russians "are not engaging in any violation of the sovereignty" of Ukraine. Russia has a military base agreement with the country.
The Ukrainian National Security Council ordered the mobilization as Russian President Vladimir Putin appeared to dismiss warnings from world leaders to avoid military intervention in Crimea, a senior Ukrainian official, Andriy Parubiy, said. The news came as evidence mounted that pro-Russian forces were already in Crimea, an autonomous region of eastern Ukraine with strong loyalty to neighboring Russia.
The Ukraine Parliament voted him out of power and he has fled to Russia. However, in a press conference Friday, the former President said -- in Russian rather than Ukrainian -- that he was not overthrown. He insisted he was still the boss and that he wants nothing more than to lead his country to peace, harmony and prosperity. While it's unclear if he could return to power, Russia's ambassador to the United Nations blamed members of the European Union for the bloody demonstrations that led to Yanukovych's ouster.
So spare me the Putin-body-slammed-Obama prattle. This isn’t All-Star Wrestling. The fact that Putin has seized Crimea, a Russian-speaking zone of Ukraine, once part of Russia, where many of the citizens prefer to be part of Russia and where Russia has a major naval base, is not like taking Poland . I support economic and diplomatic sanctions to punish Russia for its violation of international norms and making clear that harsher sanctions, even military aid for Kiev, would ensue should Putin try to bite off more of Ukraine. But we need to remember that that little corner of the world is always going to mean more, much more, to Putin than to us, and we should refrain from making threats on which we’re not going to deliver.
Public clashes between Ukrainians and Russians in the main square in Sevastopol. Ukrainians protesting at Russian interference; Crimean Russians demanding the return of Sevastopol to Russia, and that parliament recognise Russian as the state language. Ukrainian deputies barred from the government building; a Russian "information centre" opening in Sevastopol. Calls from the Ukrainian ministry of defence for an end to the agreement dividing the Black Sea fleet between the Russian and Ukrainian navies. The move is labelled a political provocation by Russian deputies. The presidium of the Crimean parliament announces a referendum on Crimean independence, and the Russian deputy says that Russia is ready to supervise it. A leader of the Russian Society of Crimea threatens armed mutiny and the establishment of a Russian administration in Sevastopol. A Russian navy chief accuses Ukraine of converting some of his Black Sea fleet, and conducting armed assault on his personnel. He threatens to place the fleet on alert. The conflict escalates into terrorism, arson attacks and murder.
Besides, Russia is now a serious economic player, if not on the scale of China. It is not Iraq or Afghanistan or Burma, small poor countries that western governments can easily impoverish to suit their moral whims. Russia can at least reply with a degree of mayhem, as indicated in last week's leaked (and sensible) Downing Street memorandum. Germany, increasingly a point of sanity in European diplomacy, clearly opposes cutting relations with Russia over Crimea. Trade is in all of Europe's interest, and is the long-term glue most likely to reduce friction between Europe and Russia.
Putin says Russia's actions fall within the scope of the 1997 Friendship Treaty between Ukraine and the Russian Federation. But with Russia apparently in operational control of the Crimea it's absurd to claim Ukraine's territorial integrity has been respected.
The referendum follows the lightning chain of events in Ukraine in recent months that included increasingly violent protests against the government, the country's pro-Russian President fleeing across the border, and then Russian troops seizing what amounts to military control of Crimea -- where Russia's Black Sea fleet is based.
"President Obama emphasized that the Crimean 'referendum,' which violates the Ukrainian constitution and occurred under duress of Russian military intervention, would never be recognized by the United States and the international community," it said. "He emphasized that Russia's actions were in violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity and that, in coordination with our European partners, we are prepared to impose additional costs on Russia for its actions."
But there seems little doubt that Ukrainian forces will be evicted from Kremlin-controlled Crimea once the truce expires. Crimea's deputy prime minister, Rustam Temirgaliyev, said on Sunday that troops would be given safe passage and predicted that eastern Ukraine would be next to join Russia. "Donetsk, Lugansk, Kharkiv have the same situation as in Crimea – 75% of people want to join Russia in eastern Ukraine," he told journalists near the parliament building in Simferopol. There was further turmoil in Donetsk when pro-Russian protesters stormed the prosecutor's office and removed the Ukrainian flag from the roof, raising a Russian flag in its place. Riot police deployed to protect the building made little effort to stop the crowd, which later dispersed.
"I support the President's decision to issue sanctions against Russian leaders, but that list must be dramatically expanded to exert real pressure," Cantor said Tuesday, also urging that Russia be kicked out of G8 and for the United States to provide military support needed by Ukraine.
It's official, Crimea is Russian. In the words of Vladimir Putin, "In people's hearts and minds, Crimea has always been an inseparable part of Russia." Indeed Russia said that in Sunday's referendum 97% of its participants, mostly ethnic Russians, insisted that to belong to the Great Russia versus Small Russia (Malorossiya, another name for Ukraine) had been their dream for 60 years since the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, my great-grandfather, transferred the peninsula's jurisdiction to Kiev. 
The Syrian government, not unlike President Obama’s critics in Washington, sees the recent events as part of a decline in America’s influence and a rise in Russia’s. By meddling in the affairs of other countries, from Iraq to the former Soviet countries, said one prominent businessman and political observer in Syria, the United States provoked the world and squandered its position as the sole global power after the Soviet Union’s collapse.
Russia's Foreign Ministry said it hoped the observers' work would stop nationalist extremists, who Moscow says have a strong influence on Kiev's government, and protect linguistic rights. Many Ukrainians speak Russian as their native language.
"We wanted to find out what they are thinking about Ukraine and what they are thinking of their plans towards Ukraine," Deshchytsia said. "We want to live peacefully with Russia. We want our nations to coexist and they will coexist. So we wanted to sit down around the table and find a solution, maybe drink vodka. But since we don't know their plans, the possibility for a military intervention is very high taking into consideration the intel information about the deployment of a very big number of Russian troops on the eastern borders of Ukraine."
At a news conference in Washington, the leaders of the House Intelligence Committee said they worked out their own bipartisan compromise on a similar proposal intended to alleviate what they characterized as unfounded fears of excessive government surveillance.
A senior administration official told CNN that the White House plan, first reported by The New York Times, would ensure "the government no longer collects or holds" the telephone metadata -- records that include the numbers and time of calls, but no content such as the actual conversation.
Snowden, now living in Russia while seeking asylum from U.S. prosecution, has repeatedly described the surveillance programs illuminated  by his leaks as unconstitutional.
News of the proposed changes came during Obama's trip to Europe, where he's mobilizing support for isolating Russia over its military occupation and annexation of Crimea from Ukraine.
In January, Obama outlined a series of steps -- some immediate and some requiring time to work out, possibly with Congress -- that would change aspects of the NSA collection of phone records and other information but generally leave intact the core and function of existing programs.
Michelle Richardson, legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union, called the reported White House plan "a crucial first step towards reining in the NSA's overreaching surveillance."
 Interim Ukrainian President Oleksandr Turchynov ordered the withdrawal of armed forces from Crimea Monday, citing Russian threats to the lives of military staff and their families.
Russian troops have seized most of Ukraine's bases in the peninsula, including a naval base at Feodosia on Monday. Russia annexed Crimea last week after a controversial referendum that Ukraine and the West say was illegal.
"The acting President of Ukraine has given an order to the Ukraine Defense Ministry for the withdrawal of all Ukrainian forces from Crimea," a spokeswoman for Turchynov told CNN. The soldiers' families will be evacuated as well.
Earlier, Russian troops stormed and seized the Ukrainian naval base in Feodosia, a port in Crimea, a Ukrainian Defense Ministry spokesman said. Witnesses said several Mi-24 and Mi-8 helicopters were involved in the raid. Between 60 and 80 Ukrainian troops were captured and taken from the base, said Vladislav Seleznev, a Ukrainian Defense Ministry spokesman in Crimea.
Russian forces consolidated their control of the Black Sea peninsula over the weekend. 
On Saturday, six Russian special forces armored personnel carriers broke through the gates of Belbek air base, firing warning shots into the air. In separate incidents, pro-Russian self-defense forces stormed the Novofederoskoe military base as well as a Ukrainian ship, the Slavutych.
On a trip to Crimea Monday, Russian Defense Minister Sergey Shoigu appointed Rear Adm. Denis Berezovsky deputy commander of the Russian Black Sea Fleet, Russia's ITAR-Tass reported.  That fleet is based in the Crimean city of Sevastopol, making it strategically important to Moscow.
Shoigu also met with former Ukrainian military personnel, who are now willing to serve in the Russian army, state news agency RIA-Novosti reported.
NATO's top military commander expressed concern Sunday about the buildup of Russian forces on Ukraine's border.
Supreme Allied Commander Europe Gen. Philip Breedlove said that Russia had a large force on Ukraine's eastern border and that he was worried it could threaten Moldova's separatist Transnistria region.
The Russian force "at the Ukrainian border now to the east is very, very sizable and very, very ready," said Breedlove, a U.S. Air Force general.
Russia said the presence of its forces complied with international agreements.  Moscow annexed Crimea after a snap referendum in the autonomous region last week that appeared to produce an overwhelming majority of votes in favor of leaving Ukraine to join Russia.
"Russia is acting much more like an adversary than a partner," Breedlove said, speaking at an event held in Brussels, Belgium, by the German Marshall Fund think tank.
A senior U.S. defense official told CNN Russia "has enough troops that we believe they could move against Ukraine at any time now." 
The official emphasized that Washington still does not know Russia's intentions on the border, despite statements by Moscow that the troops are there for exercises. U.S. intelligence also indicates that the Russian forces are positioned to possibly go after three Ukrainian cities: Kharkiv, Luhansk and Donetsk. Russian forces have moved so close to the border, there would be no warning time, and the U.S. would likely only see an incursion as it was happening, the official said.
Ukraine's new leaders -- who took office after months of protests forced President Viktor Yanukovych, a Russian ally, from office -- as well as the United States and other Western powers say Crimea is still a part of Ukraine.
Russia insists its actions are legitimate. Crimea had belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine. The region also has a majority ethnic Russian population and other long historic ties to Russia. 
Moscow has doggedly pursued its own course, even as Western leaders have denounced its actions as violations of Ukraine's sovereignty and a breach of international law.
U.S. President Barack Obama arrived at The Hague on Monday for a G7 summit on threats to nuclear security. The G7 is a group of the world's seven wealthiest industrialized nations. 
Diplomats at the G7 were talking about Ukraine on the sidelines of the long-planned summit.
"Europe and America are united in our support of the Ukrainian government and the Ukrainian people," Obama said. "We're united in imposing a cost on Russia for its actions so far."
Obama and other world leaders decided to end Russia's role in G8, the group of leading industrialized nations plus Russia, the White House said Monday.
"International law prohibits the acquisition of part or all of another state's territory through coercion or force," the White House statement said. "To do so violates the principles upon which the international system is built.  We condemn the illegal referendum held in Crimea in violation of Ukraine's constitution."
Earlier in the day, Russia's Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said being kicked out of G8 would be no big deal.
"G8 is an informal organization that does not give out any membership cards and, by its definition, cannot remove anyone," he said during a news conference. "All the economic and financial questions are decided in G20, and G8 has the purpose of existence as the forum of dialogue between the leading Western countries and Russia. 
 Ahead of Monday's G7 meeting, a representative for British Prime Minister David Cameron said Monday that no G8 meeting -- a group of the world's seven top industrial powers plus Russia -- would take place in Russia this year as previously planned.
The G7 had already suspended preparations for a planned G8 summit in the Russian city of Sochi. Monday's comment by Cameron's representative ruling the meeting out altogether comes as the West tries to increase Moscow's isolation over its actions in Ukraine.
Also at the nuclear summit Monday, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov met with Ukrainian Interim Foreign Minister Andrii Deshchytsia and, separately, with U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry.
During his meeting with Lavrov, Kerry expressed concern about Russian troops amassed on the Ukrainian border, U.S.State Department spokeswoman Marie Harf said.
Also Monday, Russia's Foreign Ministry announced it was issuing retaliatory sanctions against 13 Canadian public figures, in response to a similar move by Canada last week against Russian officials over the Crimean situation, RIA-Novosti reported.
Russia is banning the Canadian officials -- including several aides to Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper -- from entering the country, according to RIA-Novosti.
EU leaders imposed a new round of sanctions against 12 people last week, bringing the total number of people facing EU asset freezes and travel bans to 33. Canada also announced its own sanctions against Russian officials last week.
The United States announced its own new round of sanctions against 20 people and a bank that U.S. officials say is linked to Putin and senior Russian officials. Washington had already announced sanctions on 11 people.
Russia responded with its own list of sanctions against a number of U.S. lawmakers and officials.
Hackers have been busy causing service interruptions, breaching databases, and defacing hundreds of Ukrainian and Russian websites, as the crisis between the two countries plays out in cyberwarfare. 
OpRussia, a hacker group formed under the Anonymous umbrella, posted a warning to Russian President Putin that his aggression against Ukraine would not stand on March 1, 2014.
Since then, members of OpRussia have been attacking Russian business and government websites on a daily basis, including the website for the Russian Air Force, the website of the Kamchatka region, Russia's narcotics control service, and even a Russian escort service.
Russian CyberCommand is another group of hackers, some of whom are Russian, who oppose Putin's annexation of Crimea and have been relentless in their attacks against Russian businesses and agencies such as Rosoboronexport -- Russia's sole agency authorized to sell defense and dual-use products and technologies to foreign entities -- and SearchInform.ru -- a Russian IT security company that provides services to Gazprom, Skolkovo, and other important organizations.
While the name Anonymous is frequently associated with cyberoperations that support revolutionary movements, that wasn't the case with these next two groups: Anonymous Ukraine and CyberBerkut, both of whom are Pro-Russia groups.
Anonymous Ukraine attacked NATO websites on November 7 when Ukraine was considering establishing closer ties with the EU as well as NATO membership.
The group's logo and name come directly from Ukraine's old special police unit "Berkut" and there are rumors that the group is composed of either Ukrainian or Russian former security services personnel.
As of March 18, Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said that Ukraine would not be seeking NATO membership, a move designed to placate Russia as well as Ukraine's large Russian-speaking population. 
Most of the Georgian government's communications systems were shut down by Russian hackers during the conflict there in 2008. But in fact there's very little similarity, and no actual evidence linking the Russian government to the current wave of cyberattacks against Ukrainian websites.
This is not a page out of the "Russian Cyber Playbook" for several reasons:
Firstly, the Nashi, a government-financed Russian youth organization that was responsible for the attacks against Estonia in 2007 and Georgia in 2008 is no more.
And secondly, in 2008, Russian hacker forums were actively recruiting volunteers for attacks against Georgia. Not so today. In fact, many Russian hackers are angry with Putin and are supporting an independent Ukraine.
Time has not stood still since August 2008. In 2010, Russia published a new military doctrine which acknowledged the "intensification of the role of information warfare" and assigned as a task to "develop forces and resources for information warfare."
Russia and most other nations have been investing hundreds of millions of dollars to improve their capabilities to conduct electronic warfare, information warfare, and cyber warfare via increasingly sophisticated means; and by that I mean techniques that include compromising a nation's electrical grid or GPS navigation system from the canopy of a combat helicopter.
Russia, in particular, has spent the last few years developing dual-use technologies that will never be seen or defended against by its target -- for example, malware research that could be used to both defend against malware in peace time and use malware offensively as part of a military operation.
President Barack Obama and other world leaders have decided to end Russia's role in the group of leading industrialized nations, the White House said Monday.
The move to suspend Russia's membership in the G8 is the latest direct response from major countries allied against Russia's annexation of Crimea. 
"International law prohibits the acquisition of part or all of another state's territory through coercion or force," the statement said. "To do so violates the principles upon which the international system is built.  We condemn the illegal referendum held in Crimea in violation of Ukraine's constitution. 
"We also strongly condemn Russia's illegal attempt to annex Crimea in contravention of international law and specific international obligations."
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said earlier in the day that being kicked out of G8 would be no big deal.
"G8 is an informal organization that does not give out any membership cards and, by its definition, cannot remove anyone," he said during a news conference. " All the economic and financial questions are decided in G20, and G8 has the purpose of existence as the forum of dialogue between the leading Western countries and Russia."
Lavrov added that Russia was "not attached to this format and we don't see a great misfortune if it will not gather. Maybe, for a year or two, it will be an experiment for us to see how we live without it."
In a nod to political and economic reforms, the United States, Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, and Italy added Russia to their group in 1998 -- transforming it from the G7 to the G8.
An aide to British Prime Minister David Cameron confirmed to CNN that a group summit initially planned for June in Sochi, Russia, where the Winter Olympics were just held, is now off.
The United States and its allies in Europe are "united in imposing a cost on Russia for its actions so far," Obama said earlier in the Netherlands where he attended a nuclear security summit with other world leaders.
Western powers have imposed sanctions and other penalties against specific people in Russia close to President Vladimir Putin.
A senior Obama administration official, not speaking for full attribution, said Obama and other leaders agreed that further steps to punish Russian President Vladimir Putin could include sanctions on energy, banking and defense sectors -- all areas where Europe is deeply engaged economically with Russia. 
Those additional sanctions could be prompted if Russia further escalates its incursion into Ukraine, which the official defined as sending troops beyond Crimea into the southern or eastern parts of the country. Violence in the contested peninsula could also trigger further sanctions.
While the official said further penetration of Ukraine by Russian troops remains the most immediate source of concern for the United States, other potential land grabs also worry the United States and its allies. 
NATO has expressed concern Russia could attempt to reclaim a region of Moldova with Russian sympathies.
Obama has said a military incursion in Ukraine is off the table, and his advisers are hesitant to even frame the crisis in Ukraine as a bad '80s flashback -- Obama in one corner, Putin in the other. It's not "Rocky IV," as Secretary of State John Kerry said. 
National Security Adviser Susan Rice said the Russian President's actions speak for themselves.
The White House emphasis throughout the Russian occupation of Crimea has been "de-escalation."
Asked whether the United States will provide military aid to Ukraine's woefully underfunded armed forces, administration officials cautioned that such assistance could inflame tensions. 
Lavrov met with Kerry on Monday and said Russia's action in Crimea was necessary.
"It was the necessity to protect Russians who live there and who lived there for centuries," he said in the news conference. "And when our partners compare Crimea to Kosovo, because in Kosovo a lot of blood was shed then its independence was proclaimed. So we have a question then: Is it necessary for the blood to be shed in Crimea to agree on the right of the people in Crimea for self-determination?"
While Democratic and Republican lawmakers in the United States are stepping up their calls to provide Ukraine with light arms and other military aid, administration officials have argued that sanctions put in place so far must be given time to take hold. 
With an estimated 20,000 Russian troops on Ukraine's border, the question is whether Obama's use of soft power will deter Putin. 
With little resistance, the Russian President could easily move into eastern Ukraine even as Obama seeks to isolate Moscow in meetings with European allies. It's a possibility not lost on senior administration officials. 
House Intelligence Committee Chairman Mike Rogers, a Michigan Republican, argued the Russian leader is likely eying more opportunities in the coming days. 
"(Putin) has put all the military units he would need to move into Ukraine on its eastern border and is doing exercises. We see him moving forces in the south in a position where they could take the southern region over to Moldova," Rogers said on NBC's "Meet the Press."
There are other approaches. Obama's former ambassador to Russia, Michael McFaul, urged the administration to intensify its policy of isolating Putin.
"Mr. Putin's Russia has no real allies. We must keep it that way," McFaul wrote in an op-ed in the New York Times.
Obama told reporters in The Netherlands that his intelligence team gave him a "workable" option for NSA reform that he said would "eliminate " concerns about how the government keeps the records known as metadata.
Their plan would end the automatic NSA collection of phone metadata, with telecommunications companies keeping such records for at least 18 months -- as they do now.
Two layers of court approval would be needed to access the records -- one for the overall surveillance program seeking the information, and another for the specific foreign phone number being investigated, the legislators said.
Obama and the two House legislators all said Tuesday the current system was legal, but needed changing to reassure a skeptical public
"But I recognize that people were concerned about what might happen in the future with that bulk data," he said. "This proposal that's been presented to me would eliminate that concern."
"That's really what we're trying to do here is alleviate that concern that there could be abuse in the future of these programs," he said.
Authorization for the current NSA programs expires on Friday, and Obama will seek a temporary renewal until Congress passes reform legislation, the senior administration official said.
Rogers and Ruppersberger said Tuesday that nine months of negotiations involving the intelligence community and other stakeholders led to their proposed legislation.
The White House was involved in the discussions, Ruppersberger said, while Rogers noted the Obama proposal came out after the committee shared its plan with the White House earlier this week.
"We're feeling pretty good about people starting to coalesce around a solution," Rogers said, adding that "there will be people who are married to their own positions."
Initial reaction to the White House plan included praise with some caution.
Democratic Sen. Ron Wyden of Oregon, a leading critic of the NSA surveillance programs, said news of the White House plan amounted to an executive branch retreat.
"For years, the executive branch said it was essential to have this information, that it was indispensable," Wyden said, noting he and colleagues argued against that notion. "Today's exciting news for the constitutional rights of the American people is the administration said they agree with us."
"The change would replace the dragnet surveillance of millions of innocent people with targeted methods that are both effective and respect Americans' constitutional rights," Richardson said, adding: "It is critical that the administration also end other bulk collection programs."
Ukrainians had said they would leave the base if they were allowed to take their weapons with them. 
"Our focus has been and remains on the economic and diplomatic instruments at this point," Rice said. "Our interest is not in seeing the situation escalate and devolve into hot conflict."
According to the official, the proposal "still ensures that the government has access to the information it needs" for national security purposes.
Rogers argued no abuses occurred under the present system, but he acknowledged public concern about the possibility of problems down the road if the government kept such vast stores of information.
The global networks that enable the incredible global communication and information-sharing applications we have all come to enjoy, all use insecure hardware and software. Just like there's no human cell that is immune to every virus, there's no piece of software that is immune from being exploited.
Shortly after police cracked down on "Euromaidan" street protesters, who were calling for closer integration with the EU, in Kiev in November last year, Ukrainian security engineers began discussing the necessity of forming an all-volunteer cyberdefense force. By March 1, 2014, cyberattacks on both sides kicked into high gear.
As a result, the most powerful nations in the world today cannot reliably defend their own information and communications infrastructure from targeted attacks, by even a single hacker.
