Yanukovych, however, "has never been Russia's man," says Dmitri Trenin, director of the Carnegie Moscow Center. "I think it's a myth. He's been a very difficult partner for Russia, a very unreliable partner, someone who let the Russians down on many occasions. Someone absolutely not to be trusted."
Sevastopol's city council handed power to Aleksei Chaliy, a Russian citizen, during an extraordinary session on Monday evening while more than a thousand protesters gathered around city hall chanting "Russia, Russia, Russia," and "A Russian mayor for a Russian city."
Russia would fight to protect the ethnic Russian population and Moscow's base in Crimea, says Harvard's Saradzhyna, quoting a senior Russian government official who told the Financial Times, "If Ukraine breaks apart, it will trigger a war. ... They will lose Crimea first (because) we will go in and protect (it), just as we did in Georgia." 
He said he had finally decided to call it quits on Tuesday, and now hoped to get work in Russia. Crimea, which Russia transferred to Ukraine in 1954, is still almost entirely Russian-speaking and home to the headquarters of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet. It voted overwhelmingly for Mr. Yanukovych in 2010 — he received 84 percent of the vote against Yulia V. Tymoshenko, the former prime minister — embracing him as a strong and reliable leader who would hold the forces of Ukrainian nationalism at bay and strengthen ties with Moscow. Most residents cheered in November when Mr. Yanukovych rejected a trade deal with the European Union and turned to Moscow instead.
The seizure, coming a day after Russia ordered surprise military exercises on Ukraine's doorstep, has raised fears about the push and pull of opposing allegiances in a country sandwiched between Russia and the European Union.
"We are now deeply concerned by reports of military movements taken by the Russian Federation inside of Ukraine," Obama said. "Russia has a historic relationship with Ukraine, including cultural and economic ties, and a military facility in Crimea, but any violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity would be deeply destabilizing, which is not in the interest of Ukraine, Russia, or Europe.
Russia now has 15,000 troops in Ukraine's Crimea region, Yegor Pyvovarov, the spokesman for the Ukraine mission at the United Nations, told CNN ahead of Saturday's session of the Security Council. He did not say how Ukraine arrived at that number, or whether that included troops already stationed at a Russian base in the region. 
He had his reasons. Chief among them was Russia's opposition to it. Russia threatened its much smaller neighbor with trade sanctions and steep gas bills if Ukraine forged ahead. If Ukraine didn't, and instead joined a Moscow-led Customs Union, it would get deep discounts on natural gas, Russia said.
Imagine that an anti-Russian Ukrainian government gained power and actually won its legal suit.  Then what?  In the best-case scenario, Ukraine would win a legal declaration on its side, which might make Russia liable to compensate Ukraine for its losses.  Russia could then refuse to comply, or it could do what the United States did to settle the illegal use of force suit that Nicaragua won in front of the ICJ. Russia could require that Ukraine relinquish its claim if it wants to receive its aid package. And Ukraine would have few options, since ICJ rulings can only be enforced by the Security Council (again, on which Russia holds veto power).  
The Crimean peninsula itself had been ruled by Russia for centuries until Nikita Khrushchev gave it away to Ukraine in 1954, a move that was deeply unpopular in Russia – some say Khrushchev was drunk at the time –and most ordinary Russians – as well, it seems, as a majority of Crimeans themselves – would like to see it returned to Russia. Putin is also off the hook over the Ukrainian economy. Previously, Russia had agreed to bail out Kiev, but it seems that now this cost will be borne by European taxpayers. Will Ukraine also be offered membership of the EU? This is what most of the Maidan protesters were hoping for, but in truth, it was never on offer.
Besides, Russia is now a serious economic player, if not on the scale of China. It is not Iraq or Afghanistan or Burma, small poor countries that western governments can easily impoverish to suit their moral whims. Russia can at least reply with a degree of mayhem, as indicated in last week's leaked (and sensible) Downing Street memorandum. Germany, increasingly a point of sanity in European diplomacy, clearly opposes cutting relations with Russia over Crimea. Trade is in all of Europe's interest, and is the long-term glue most likely to reduce friction between Europe and Russia.
In the end, while violations of international sovereignty merit a forceful response, whether Crimea is part of Ukraine or part of Russia will have little enduring impact on US national security – just as Russia’s invasion of Georgia (much bemoaned at the time by the moar crowd) did little to impact US strategic interests. So long as NATO exists as the guarantor of European peace and security – and serves as a deterrent to any further Russian ambitions – we’ll be fine. If anything, it’s Russia that will suffer, from greater diplomatic and economic isolation.
However, his call for Russian troops in Crimea to return to their barracks and negotiations between Russia and Ukraine on a solution has so far yielded little progress.
Russia tightened its military grip on Saturday within Ukraine. About 60 Russian troops in six helicopters and three armored vehicles reportedly crossed into Ukraine's Kherson region and were in the town of Strilkove, on a strip of land just northeast of Crimea.
Anatoliy Sidorov and Aleksandr Galkin are both commanders of units deployed in Crimea. The EU said they are responsible for "part of the Russian military presence in Crimea which is undermining the sovereignty of the Ukraine and assisted the Crimean authorities in preventing public demonstrations against moves towards a referendum and incorporation into Russia".
"Don't believe those who try to frighten you with Russia and who scream that other regions will follow after Crimea," said Putin, going some way to allaying those fears. "We do not want a partition of Ukraine. We do not need this."
It's official, Crimea is Russian. In the words of Vladimir Putin, "In people's hearts and minds, Crimea has always been an inseparable part of Russia." Indeed Russia said that in Sunday's referendum 97% of its participants, mostly ethnic Russians, insisted that to belong to the Great Russia versus Small Russia (Malorossiya, another name for Ukraine) had been their dream for 60 years since the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, my great-grandfather, transferred the peninsula's jurisdiction to Kiev. 
Most crucially, after chemical attacks last August, Russia helped avert an American military strike by brokering a deal to remove Syria’s toxic arms. “Thank you, Russia,” read fliers in Russian and Arabic taped to downtown Damascus walls.
Russia insists its actions are legitimate. Crimea had belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine.
Amid fears of further Russian military moves in Ukraine, G7 meets in The Hague without Russia for the first time since 1998
News of the proposed changes came during Obama's trip to Europe, where he's mobilizing support for isolating Russia over its military occupation and annexation of Crimea from Ukraine.
Russian troops have seized most of Ukraine's bases in the peninsula, including a naval base at Feodosia on Monday. Russia annexed Crimea last week after a controversial referendum that Ukraine and the West say was illegal.
NATO's top military commander expressed concern Sunday about the buildup of Russian forces on Ukraine's border.
A senior U.S. defense official told CNN Russia "has enough troops that we believe they could move against Ukraine at any time now." 
Russia insists its actions are legitimate. Crimea had belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine. The region also has a majority ethnic Russian population and other long historic ties to Russia. 
Russian CyberCommand is another group of hackers, some of whom are Russian, who oppose Putin's annexation of Crimea and have been relentless in their attacks against Russian businesses and agencies such as Rosoboronexport -- Russia's sole agency authorized to sell defense and dual-use products and technologies to foreign entities -- and SearchInform.ru -- a Russian IT security company that provides services to Gazprom, Skolkovo, and other important organizations.
As of March 18, Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said that Ukraine would not be seeking NATO membership, a move designed to placate Russia as well as Ukraine's large Russian-speaking population. 
"(Putin) has put all the military units he would need to move into Ukraine on its eastern border and is doing exercises. We see him moving forces in the south in a position where they could take the southern region over to Moldova," Rogers said on NBC's "Meet the Press."
