British expats could forfeit their rights to live in Spain if they vote to leave the EU, the Spanish prime minister has warned, saying forgoing free movement rights would be “negative for everyone”.
The so-called special relationship with the United States isn’t providing much comfort to the Brexit side these days; President Obama’s recent admonition to vote no in the referendum enraged many people who believe America should stay out of it and let their country think for itself.
Leave campaigners have argued that new rights for British citizens to live and work in other EU countries could be negotiated after Brexit.
Free movement and its effects on migration to the UK is one of the key issues for voters, according to new polling conducted by Vote Leave, which found almost half of those surveyed said levels of migration from the other 27 EU countries had been bad for the UK, against 26% who thought it had benefited Britain.If you want to have your say on the future of Britain’s role in the EU, you need to be on the electoral register, which means registering to vote.
The EU remains the most important market for UK goods, so it is possible that any competitive gains from a cheaper pound would be negated by trade barriers in the event of a vote to leave.
• With the polls indicating that the possibility of a vote to leave the EU is looming larger, it is natural that thoughts should turn to the issue of how we would cope with the changes that would ensue.
Vote Leave, the official out campaign, responded to leaks of the plans by accusing the chancellor of breaking seven key Tory pledges on which they were elected last year, and set out a competing vision of a post-Brexit world in which Britain would claw back money from the EU.
Recent polls are showing that support in Britain for leaving the European Union is on the rise: More voters are backing a departure from the bloc than are opting to stay.
“While recognising that this choice is for UK voters to make and that their decisions will reflect both economic and non-economic factors, directors agreed that the net economic effects of leaving the EU would likely be negative and substantial,” they said in a press release accompanying the report.
According to the British Election Study, the overall vote is pretty evenly split between Brexit and remain, but two thirds of Britain’s minority ethnic voters favour staying in the EU.
(CNN) Scotland will likely seek independence for a second time this decade after the historic vote for the United Kingdom to leave the European Union, Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said Friday.
Britain’s vote to leave the European Union poses difficult questions for investment firms like Greylock, which made big bets on Greece as it teetered on the brink of economic collapse.
At a time when many European countries are dealing with flagging economies, Mr. Humes said he was concerned that the Brexit vote would feed a growing populist surge across the Continent, threatening to chip away at the foundation of the European Union.
Despite fronting the campaign to leave the EU and being “most trusted” by voters on the issues, the former London mayor Boris Johnson was judged by intimate insiders not to be up to the task of negotiating complex Brexit agreements, his heart not really in it either.
These voters were overwhelmingly going to vote leave, regardless of the arguments.
In April 2015, when the nascent remain team first looked in detail at the spectrum of attitudes, the “hearts v heads” voters on balance – and mostly with reluctance – came down in favour of remaining in the EU by 55% to 45%.
On 23 June 2016 they voted in favour of leaving the EU by about the same margin.
The result made clear the existential threat that this poses to the Labour party now – and in the foreseeable future, unless it can square the circle, to the Conservative party too.Scottish voters are reconsidering their opposition to independence after the Brexit vote, the SNP’s business convener, Derek Mackay, has said, despite a poll that found a majority still favoured being part of the UK outside the EU.
At 62%, almost two-thirds of Scots who took part in last month’s referendum on EU membership voted to remain, prompting the SNP’s leader and Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, to say that the leave result made another vote on Scottish independence highly likely.
“The prime minister has been very clear that we are going to make a success of Brexit, and the focus now needs to be on collaborative working with the Scottish government as ‘Team UK’ to ensure the best possible deal for Scotland and the rest of the UK.”
“In light of the overwhelming vote to remain in the EU, it is right that the Scottish government explores every option to protect our relationship with and place in the EU, including the option of another independence referendum if that is what it takes.
The arithmetic told us that motivating and mobilising pro-EU voters would be nowhere near enough; we would also need the votes of people whose underlying attitudes meant they would find the leave campaign’s arguments compelling and would be hard to persuade.
These people were the in-play voters: the primary target for both campaigns in the EU referendum.
One of the few straightforward ways to try to get across the risks of leaving the EU was to point out the overwhelming weight of opinion among economists, businesses, unions – the reviled “experts”.
“This poll is the latest to demonstrate that many no voters are reconsidering their opposition to independence now that Scotland faces being dragged out of the EU against our will,” Mackay said.
“While Scottish independence has been mooted in the wake of the vote to leave the EU, a new referendum is not currently on the table.
Saturday’s findings follow another recent poll which found almost a third of voters wanted to wait until the UK’s deal with the EU was clear before deciding whether to hold another independence referendum.YouGov’s Matthew Smith said: “One month after the UK’s shock decision to leave the EU, the latest YouGov research in Scotland shows no real shift towards independence.”