British expats could forfeit their rights to live in Spain if they vote to leave the EU, the Spanish prime minister has warned, saying forgoing free movement rights would be “negative for everyone”.
Leave campaigners have argued that new rights for British citizens to live and work in other EU countries could be negotiated after Brexit.
Free movement and its effects on migration to the UK is one of the key issues for voters, according to new polling conducted by Vote Leave, which found almost half of those surveyed said levels of migration from the other 27 EU countries had been bad for the UK, against 26% who thought it had benefited Britain.Here’s what you need to know about casting your ballot to remain in or leave the European Union, including how to register
The EU remains the most important market for UK goods, so it is possible that any competitive gains from a cheaper pound would be negated by trade barriers in the event of a vote to leave.
But it is quite unclear what that mandate might be, as the referendum question does not specify the range of alternatives to full EU membership should the UK vote to leave.
The paper has not so far unambiguously editorialized in favor of leaving, but the tone was set in February, when Mr. Cameron renegotiated Britain’s ties to the European Union, before recommending a vote to remain.
Vote Leave, the official out campaign, responded to leaks of the plans by accusing the chancellor of breaking seven key Tory pledges on which they were elected last year, and set out a competing vision of a post-Brexit world in which Britain would claw back money from the EU.
The fund’s latest comments on a possible Brexit echoed the Bank of England’s warning on Thursday that leaving the EU would risk pushing the pound sharply lower and sending shockwaves through the global economy.I want people to know what the consequences of leaving the EU would be before they cast their votes, rather than after.
“If there were to be a vote to leave, then as far as the prime minister is concerned I don’t see how he is going to remain in his job for very long at all,” he said.
He voted for Britain to leave and said he was not concerned with the economic downturn that Britain potentially faces.
Scottish voters are reconsidering their opposition to independence after the Brexit vote, the SNP’s business convener, Derek Mackay, has said, despite a poll that found a majority still favoured being part of the UK outside the EU.
At 62%, almost two-thirds of Scots who took part in last month’s referendum on EU membership voted to remain, prompting the SNP’s leader and Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, to say that the leave result made another vote on Scottish independence highly likely.
The arithmetic told us that motivating and mobilising pro-EU voters would be nowhere near enough; we would also need the votes of people whose underlying attitudes meant they would find the leave campaign’s arguments compelling and would be hard to persuade.
YouGov’s Matthew Smith said: “One month after the UK’s shock decision to leave the EU, the latest YouGov research in Scotland shows no real shift towards independence.”
“This poll is the latest to demonstrate that many no voters are reconsidering their opposition to independence now that Scotland faces being dragged out of the EU against our will,” Mackay said.
“The arguments for Scotland remaining a part of the UK are just as compelling as they were in 2014, in or out of the EU,” he said.