Since Hong Kong was returned by Britain to Chinese rule in 1997, it has enjoyed considerable legal autonomy under the “one country, two systems” formula, in which Hong Kong residents retained rights not available elsewhere in China.
The Chinese central government said that it is "confident" that the Hong Kong government can handle the movement lawfully, according to a report in Chinese state media.
Hong Kong’s former security chief Regina Ip said on Monday that the city government fears a “mini-Tiananmen” – presumably that the protests would be violently dispersed, perhaps by the Chinese military.
Chinese state media has also emphasised the central government’s confidence in Hong Kong authorities to deal with the protests themselves.
Hong Kong protesters passionate but gullible, says China's 1997 handover negotiator
The protests will never spill over into the rest of China … For the minority of people who want to foment a ‘colour revolution’ on the mainland by way of Hong Kong, this is but a daydream,” it said.
China’s leaders “have ignored the man on the street for so long because everyone told them Hong Kong people aren’t interested in politics, that it’s all about business, and they haven’t realized that society has clearly changed,” said Fraser J.T. Howie, a co-author of “Red Capitalism: The Fragile Financial Foundation of China’s Extraordinary Rise.”
“My mother came to my room and told me before I went to sleep, ‘You are so lucky you are in Hong Kong, you are not in mainland China,’ ” she said.
The Chinese never made good on their threat to invade, in part because they hoped the “one country, two systems” model they eventually adopted for Hong Kong would encourage peaceful reunification with Taiwan, the self-governed island that China claims as its own.
“This is a demonstration of what we’ve been fearing for years,” said Shirley Yam, vice-chairwoman of the Hong Kong Journalists Association and a columnist for the South China Morning Post.
Nearly five years ago, young people led protests against the wasteful construction of a new rail line connecting Hong Kong to mainland China.
"The leaders in Beijing are afraid that if they give democracy to Hong Kong, then other parts of China, like Xinjiang and Tibet, will also ask for it," said a 17-year old female high school student who lives in Taipei.
He said he believed China’s moves were in breach of Hong Kong’s mini-constitution, the Basic Law.
“The idea is to make 10 of these, one on each lamppost, lining the street all the way past the P.L.A. building to Central,” he said, referring to the People’s Liberation Army headquarters and Hong Kong’s business district.
Other news articles, social media posts, and images of Hong Kong's protests have been heavily censored in China: as the first images of the occupation went viral, even Instagram became inaccessible.
A growing number of people in Hong Kong who have taken part in the city’s recent pro-democracy protests aresuddenly finding themselves denied entry into China.
“Everything we watch on the news about mainland China – the paranoia, human rights abuses, the way the Communist party treats its citizens – for the first time in my life, I feel that way about Hong Kong,” she said.
“This new trend of denying entry is a powerful weapon, not just against students but against professionals who want to support the movement,” said Willy Lam, a political analyst at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
According to the Chinese government, Hong Kong residents made 154m trips to the mainland in 2013 alone, up 3.4% from the year before.
Eric Tang, 21, a student at Open University of Hong Kong, said he was turned away this month while trying to shop with his girlfriend in Shenzhen.
For theyoung design student, who was also arrested at the 1 July protest and released on 2 July,not having access to China may mean buying costlier, inferior design materials in Hong Kong and perhaps a lower grade in her classes.