Since Hong Kong was returned by Britain to Chinese rule in 1997, it has enjoyed considerable legal autonomy under the “one country, two systems” formula, in which Hong Kong residents retained rights not available elsewhere in China.
The protesters were responding to China's decision to allow only Beijing-vetted candidates to stand in the city's elections for chief executive, Hong Kong's top civil position.
Hong Kong protesters passionate but gullible, says China's 1997 handover negotiator
The protests will never spill over into the rest of China … For the minority of people who want to foment a ‘colour revolution’ on the mainland by way of Hong Kong, this is but a daydream,” it said.
“Hong Kong has been acting as a reference point for China — whatever they want to do, they come to Hong Kong to take a look first, and if it is good they pick it up,” said Li Kui-Wai, an associate professor of economics and finance at the City University of Hong Kong.
“Since the handover, the ‘one country, two system’ formula has protected Hong Kong’s lifestyle,” Li said, referring to the formula under which the city has been run since its return from British to Chinese rule in 1997.
During that weekend, police in Hong Kong arrested about 70 student protesters, including several of its young leaders, in the mass call for democracy.
“Regardless of how official the bans might be, they can always achieve the same result by scaring off people or companies who might otherwise want to approach us,” said Ms. Ho, who was camping out this week beneath an overpass near Hong Kong’s government headquarters amid a sea of colorful tents.
“You have violated the principles of ‘one country, two systems,’ challenged the authority of the central party, ignored the Basic Law, and earned fistfuls of cash only to then turn and scold your motherland,” said the commentary, singling out Ms. Ho, Mr. Wong and a Hong Kong actor, Chapman To, who have been among the most visible celebrities at the protest sites.
The Chinese never made good on their threat to invade, in part because they hoped the “one country, two systems” model they eventually adopted for Hong Kong would encourage peaceful reunification with Taiwan, the self-governed island that China claims as its own.
China’s leaders also had no interest in disrupting Hong Kong’s wildly successful economy, a vital outlet for foreign trade and hard currency at a time when China was largely isolated from the industrialized world.
Ma says his government is watching pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong closely to see whether Beijing will honor its initial promises on universal suffrage.
He said he believed China’s moves were in breach of Hong Kong’s mini-constitution, the Basic Law.
to tell people what we feel about Hong Kong," Lau said.
At the APEC summit in November, Xi called the protests an "illegal movement" and declared his support for the Hong Kong government's handling of the situation.
A growing number of people in Hong Kong who have taken part in the city’s recent pro-democracy protests aresuddenly finding themselves denied entry into China.
Among those who have reported being turned away at the border are a member of the student union at Hong Kong Baptist University, a Lingnan University studentwho was trying to buy books in the Chinese city of Shenzhen and a City University student trying to visit relatives.
Eric Tang, 21, a student at Open University of Hong Kong, said he was turned away this month while trying to shop with his girlfriend in Shenzhen.
For theyoung design student, who was also arrested at the 1 July protest and released on 2 July,not having access to China may mean buying costlier, inferior design materials in Hong Kong and perhaps a lower grade in her classes.
“Everything we watch on the news about mainland China – the paranoia, human rights abuses, the way the Communist party treats its citizens – for the first time in my life, I feel that way about Hong Kong,” she said.
People in Hong Kong holdlarge annual rallies on the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square crackdown and freely discuss China’s political system on social media like Facebook and Twitter.
“This new trend of denying entry is a powerful weapon, not just against students but against professionals who want to support the movement,” said Willy Lam, a political analyst at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.