Will Hong Kong get democracy?
Searches on China's top search engine sites such as Baidu and Sogou for the terms "Hong Kong protest" or even "Hong Kong students" yielded irrelevant results such as stories showing a a blissful image of Hong Kong residents picnicking on the grass or how Hong Kong is welcoming tourists from the mainland during the national holiday week.
"The protesters are unhappy because Hong Kong is becoming more and more like China," Chinese tourist, 24-year old Liujing, from Hainan, told CNN at spillover protests in the Mong Kok region of Kowloon.
If Hong Kong became like China then that would be a real shame."
All the pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong that you’ve been reading about lately?
That’s why we’re here,” he added.What Prompted the Hong Kong Protests?
“Hong Kong has been acting as a reference point for China — whatever they want to do, they come to Hong Kong to take a look first, and if it is good they pick it up,” said Li Kui-Wai, an associate professor of economics and finance at the City University of Hong Kong.
And the version in Cantonese — the dialect of Hong Kong and southern China, whose use Beijing has been working to limit in recent years — was rewritten around the dream of achieving democracy.
The protests have created a divide among the celebrities in Hong Kong.
“I was personally very stunned that Beijing could unabashedly tell lies in the face of so many Hong Kong people, because Hong Kong people can vividly remember the democracy struggle between the former British government and the Chinese government,” said Ming Sing, a political scientist at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Ma says his government is watching pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong closely to see whether Beijing will honor its initial promises on universal suffrage.
Britain should be doing more to help the governments of Hong Kong and China settle the situation, he said, calling on Hong Kong’s leaders to offer more concessions to the protesters to encourage them to back down."We can use different media to express ourselves...
A growing number of people in Hong Kong who have taken part in the city’s recent pro-democracy protests aresuddenly finding themselves denied entry into China.
Eric Tang, 21, a student at Open University of Hong Kong, said he was turned away this month while trying to shop with his girlfriend in Shenzhen.
For theyoung design student, who was also arrested at the 1 July protest and released on 2 July,not having access to China may mean buying costlier, inferior design materials in Hong Kong and perhaps a lower grade in her classes.
“This new trend of denying entry is a powerful weapon, not just against students but against professionals who want to support the movement,” said Willy Lam, a political analyst at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
“Everything we watch on the news about mainland China – the paranoia, human rights abuses, the way the Communist party treats its citizens – for the first time in my life, I feel that way about Hong Kong,” she said.