Puigdemont suggested he planned to take part from Brussels, telling a local TV channel: “I can run a campaign from anywhere in the world, as we are in living in a globalised world.” He had already signalled his intention to stay in Brussels as long as possible, retaining a defence lawyer and saying he believed the Spanish courts were politicised, although he has ruled out claiming political asylum.
A Spanish judge issued an international arrest warrant for Puigdemont on Friday, a day after eight members of the dissolved Catalan government were jailed in Spain.
We decide!” At the height of Spain’s economic crisis, more than a million people protest in Barcelona on Catalonia’s national day, demanding independence in what will become a peaceful, annual show of strength.
Spain’s constitutional court suspends the legislation the following day, but the Catalan government vows to press ahead with the vote.
Some 40,000 people protest against the police crackdown in Barcelona and Puigdemont accuses the Spanish government of effectively suspending regional autonomy and declaring a de facto state of emergency.
The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%.
Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic.
Spanish prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, fires regional president, Carles Puigdemont, and orders regional elections to be held on 21 December.
Judge Pablo Llarena set bail of €150,000, or about $175,000, for Carme Forcadell, who, as speaker of the Catalan Parliament, had read out Catalonia’s declaration of independence from Spain on Oct. 27, shortly before it was approved by separatist lawmakers.
On Thursday, the supreme court ruled to release on bail the Catalan parliament’s speaker Carme Forcadell and four other lawmakers, who enabled the declaration of independence by overseeing a parliamentary vote.
MADRID — In his first visit to Catalonia since taking control of the restive region in Spain, Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy on Sunday urged Catalans to vote in next month’s elections to defeat the independence movement and return the region to “normality.”
Spain’s prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, claimed on Monday that half of the Twitter accounts that amplified the issue of Catalan independence were registered in Russia and 30% in Venezuela.
Police arrested at least five protesters, according to the Hong Kong Federation of Students, one of the groups that has played an important role in organising the protest movement, which is seeking free elections in the former British colony.
“We feel that the government feels no pressure if this movement simply drags on like this,” said Oscar Lai, a leader of Scholarism, a protest group of high school and university students, who urged protesters to peacefully block the Hong Kong leader’s office.
The 18-year-old activist, who leads a student group called Scholarism, wants open elections for Hong Kong's next leader, but Beijing has said Hong Kong may only hold elections if candidates are nominated by a small committee.
Mr. Puigdemont’s lawyer told the Belgian news media on Saturday that the five former Catalan ministers were likely to stay in Belgium until after the Catalan elections on Dec. 21, and possibly even until mid-January.
His Belgian lawyer said last weekend that Mr. Puigdemont and the four former Catalan ministers intended to stay in Belgium until after the elections, and possibly beyond that.
The sight of peaceful, sober-minded pro-democracy leaders among the 209 people arrested during the clearance of the camp embodied a volatile new current in Hong Kong politics, said Fernando Cheung, a democracy supporter who is a member of the city’s Legislative Council.
Since 7 November, the mainland’s border patrol has denied entry to at least nine Hong Kong residents with no criminal records, including student leaders who wanted to press their case for democratic elections, lawmaker Cyd Ho said at a public hearing on 3 December.
Judge Andrew Macrae told Hui before sentencing: “To know that the former number two in government had received bribes must be a deep disappointment to many people in Hong Kong,” he said.
"The Spanish government just doesn't like that our schools teach the history of our country, and that they point out that there are differences between Spain and Catalonia," said Font, a 35-year-old.
After Catalonia’s separatist lawmakers declared independence in late October, Mr. Rajoy invoked emergency powers for the first time in Spain’s democratic history.
Catalonia’s election result is a serious rebuff for the Spanish government, which called Thursday’s poll after putting the region under direct rule in October.
When Spain’s prime minister Mariano Rajoy decided to impose direct rule over Catalonia in October, and call a snap election to replace its regional parliament – after it had declared independence from Spain – he thought he was “restoring normality” to Catalan politics and putting an end to the conflict.
But far from a deja vu, this will be something never seen before, for the likely president of that government, Carles Puigdemont, is in self-imposed exile in Belgium, some of his ministers are in jail in Spain, and all are accused by the supreme court of rebellion, a charge that could result in up to 30 years in prison.
Story highlights The former Catalan leader says Spain's PM should accept regional election results
(CNN) The former leader of Catalonia urged Madrid to enter political negotiations following a regional election that gave pro-independence parties a majority in the Catalan parliament.
In a recorded address made from self-imposed exile in Brussels, Belgium, Puigdemont appealed to Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy to accept the election results.