A Spanish judge issued an international arrest warrant for Puigdemont on Friday, a day after eight members of the dissolved Catalan government were jailed in Spain.
Does anyone think that the sacked Catalan government can expect a fair and independent hearing, uninfluenced by political and media pressure?
Timeline Eight key moments in the Catalan independence campaign Show Hide Spain’s constitutional court strikes down parts of a 2006 charter on Catalan autonomy that had originally increased the region’s fiscal and judicial powers and described it as a “nation”.
We decide!” At the height of Spain’s economic crisis, more than a million people protest in Barcelona on Catalonia’s national day, demanding independence in what will become a peaceful, annual show of strength.
The pro-independence government of Artur Mas defies the Madrid government and Spain’s constitutional court by holding a symbolic vote on independence.
Spain’s constitutional court suspends the legislation the following day, but the Catalan government vows to press ahead with the vote.
Police arrest 14 Catalan government officials suspected of organising the referendum and announce they have seized nearly 10 million ballots destined for the vote.
Some 40,000 people protest against the police crackdown in Barcelona and Puigdemont accuses the Spanish government of effectively suspending regional autonomy and declaring a de facto state of emergency.
The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%.
Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic.
Judge Pablo Llarena set bail of €150,000, or about $175,000, for Carme Forcadell, who, as speaker of the Catalan Parliament, had read out Catalonia’s declaration of independence from Spain on Oct. 27, shortly before it was approved by separatist lawmakers.
On Thursday, the supreme court ruled to release on bail the Catalan parliament’s speaker Carme Forcadell and four other lawmakers, who enabled the declaration of independence by overseeing a parliamentary vote.
Mr. Rajoy’s government took charge of Catalonia on Oct. 27, using emergency powers under Article 155 of the Spanish Constitution, shortly after separatist lawmakers voted for independence from Spain.
He fired the Catalan government, dissolved the Catalan Parliament and set new regional elections for Dec. 21.
(CNN) The Spanish government said it has intelligence suggesting Russian-based groups used social media to spread "misinformation" related to Catalonia's independence referendum.
Spain’s prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, claimed on Monday that half of the Twitter accounts that amplified the issue of Catalan independence were registered in Russia and 30% in Venezuela.
“Surround the government,” Nathan Law, a leading member of the Hong Kong Federation of Students, said from a podium in the Admiralty protest camp where thousands of people had gathered.
(CNN) A Spanish judge has ruled the former Vice President of Catalonia and three other senior Catalan pro-independence leaders will remain in jail for their part in October's independence referendum, ruled illegal by Spain's top court.
Mr. Puigdemont and other separatists are waging a high-stakes battle with the Spanish government over independence, touched off by an Oct. 1 referendum that the Spanish government says should never have taken place because it violated Spain’s Constitution.
Judge Andrew Macrae told Hui before sentencing: “To know that the former number two in government had received bribes must be a deep disappointment to many people in Hong Kong,” he said.
"The Spanish government just doesn't like that our schools teach the history of our country, and that they point out that there are differences between Spain and Catalonia," said Font, a 35-year-old.
After Catalonia’s separatist lawmakers declared independence in late October, Mr. Rajoy invoked emergency powers for the first time in Spain’s democratic history.
Catalonia’s election result is a serious rebuff for the Spanish government, which called Thursday’s poll after putting the region under direct rule in October.
But far from a deja vu, this will be something never seen before, for the likely president of that government, Carles Puigdemont, is in self-imposed exile in Belgium, some of his ministers are in jail in Spain, and all are accused by the supreme court of rebellion, a charge that could result in up to 30 years in prison.
Story highlights The former Catalan leader says Spain's PM should accept regional election results
(CNN) The former leader of Catalonia urged Madrid to enter political negotiations following a regional election that gave pro-independence parties a majority in the Catalan parliament.