A Spanish judge issued an international arrest warrant for Puigdemont on Friday, a day after eight members of the dissolved Catalan government were jailed in Spain.
The vice-president and seven Catalan government ministers have been in prison since last Thursday, as well as two Catalan civic leaders, while orders for the rest of the Catalan government to be detained have been issued.
We decide!” At the height of Spain’s economic crisis, more than a million people protest in Barcelona on Catalonia’s national day, demanding independence in what will become a peaceful, annual show of strength.
The pro-independence government of Artur Mas defies the Madrid government and Spain’s constitutional court by holding a symbolic vote on independence.
Spain’s constitutional court suspends the legislation the following day, but the Catalan government vows to press ahead with the vote.
Police arrest 14 Catalan government officials suspected of organising the referendum and announce they have seized nearly 10 million ballots destined for the vote.
Some 40,000 people protest against the police crackdown in Barcelona and Puigdemont accuses the Spanish government of effectively suspending regional autonomy and declaring a de facto state of emergency.
The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%.
Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic.
Last month, Spain’s attorney general demanded that 20 Catalan politicians be prosecuted on charges ranging from rebellion and sedition to the misuse of public funds while organizing an independence referendum on Oct. 1 that had been declared illegal by the Spanish government and courts.On Thursday, the supreme court ruled to release on bail the Catalan parliament’s speaker Carme Forcadell and four other lawmakers, who enabled the declaration of independence by overseeing a parliamentary vote.
Mr. Rajoy’s government took charge of Catalonia on Oct. 27, using emergency powers under Article 155 of the Spanish Constitution, shortly after separatist lawmakers voted for independence from Spain.
He fired the Catalan government, dissolved the Catalan Parliament and set new regional elections for Dec. 21.
Spain’s prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, claimed on Monday that half of the Twitter accounts that amplified the issue of Catalan independence were registered in Russia and 30% in Venezuela.
“Surround the government,” Nathan Law, a leading member of the Hong Kong Federation of Students, said from a podium in the Admiralty protest camp where thousands of people had gathered.
Separatists, including Mr. Puigdemont, the former Catalan leader, have argued that Spain’s judiciary jailed Catalan leaders unjustifiably on political grounds.
Mr. Puigdemont and other separatists are waging a high-stakes battle with the Spanish government over independence, touched off by an Oct. 1 referendum that the Spanish government says should never have taken place because it violated Spain’s Constitution.
The sight of peaceful, sober-minded pro-democracy leaders among the 209 people arrested during the clearance of the camp embodied a volatile new current in Hong Kong politics, said Fernando Cheung, a democracy supporter who is a member of the city’s Legislative Council.
The central government called the December 21 vote in the hope of finding a more moderate government to deal with, following an illegally held independence referendum that triggered Spain's worst political crisis in decades.
Madrid responded by firing the entire government, dissolving the Catalan Parliament and imposing direct rule over the region.
"The Spanish government just doesn't like that our schools teach the history of our country, and that they point out that there are differences between Spain and Catalonia," said Font, a 35-year-old.
Catalonia’s election result is a serious rebuff for the Spanish government, which called Thursday’s poll after putting the region under direct rule in October.
Instead, parties that favour independence have been returned with a narrow majority in the new Catalan parliament in spite of, and perhaps because of, the jailing and exile of key leaders.
But far from a deja vu, this will be something never seen before, for the likely president of that government, Carles Puigdemont, is in self-imposed exile in Belgium, some of his ministers are in jail in Spain, and all are accused by the supreme court of rebellion, a charge that could result in up to 30 years in prison.
Story highlights The former Catalan leader says Spain's PM should accept regional election results
(CNN) The former leader of Catalonia urged Madrid to enter political negotiations following a regional election that gave pro-independence parties a majority in the Catalan parliament.