More than 270 people are still unaccounted for as efforts continue to rescue passengers aboard a South Korean ferry that sank off the country’s south-west coast on Wednesday morning.
Officials said six of the ship’s 462 passengers had died, at least 55 are injured and 179 have been rescued.
Dozens of coastguard and navy vessels were battling to rescue passengers, including 325 high school pupils and their teachers.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest South Korean coastguards on the rescue operation around the stricken passenger ferry Sewol on Wednesday.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Coastguards rescuing passengers and crew aboard the South Korean ferry Sewol which sank on Wednesday on its way to Jeju island from Incheon.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest An injured passenger is stretchered by rescue personnel after ferry Sewol sank in waters off South Korea on Wednesday.
Survivors of Wednesday's ferry accident off the coast of South Korea have described chaotic scenes after the vessel listed and started to sink, possibly after running aground, forcing petrified passengers to jump into the sea before it disappeared beneath the water.
Other survivors said they feared the death toll would rise significantly as they believed dozens of people were still trapped inside the ferry after it listed and then sank into the sea about 20km (12 miles) from the coast of Byungpoong island about two hours after issuing a distress signal.
The ferry operator reportedly asked passengers to stay inside their cabins, Kim said, adding that he had not heard an announcement urging people to leave the ship before it sank.
The captain, Lee Joon-seok, has defended his decision to tell passengers to stay put as the ferry began sinking, saying he was concerned about the sea's strong currents and cold water as well as the lack of rescue ships.
In videos recovered from the cellphones of passengers aboard the ferry Sewol, a voice can be heard over the ship’s intercom urging students and their teachers to stay put, telling them they are safer where they are.
Among the text messages, photos and video clips that have been produced by passengers of the ill-fated ship, Su-hyeon’s 15-minute footage bears the most dramatic witness to the panic and fear, as well as youthful naïveté and optimism, of the students trapped inside the ship while many of the crew members, including the captain, were among the first to desert their vessel.
“The ship is leaning!” one passenger can be heard saying.
Another wondered, “Are we going to die?” A minute later, as the ship listed further, some students suggested donning life jackets.
The ship’s captain and crew members later told reporters and investigators that they had thought it was safer for the passengers to stay in their cabins than to move in a panicked mass, causing the ship to list faster, or for them to jump into cold waters when the rescue ships were still far away.
One of Ye-seul’s classmates could be heard pleading: “Save us, save us.” But one of the first things the Coast Guard rescuers did was help the ship’s captain, Lee Jun-seok, and other crew members off the sinking ferry.
When he was deserting the ship, the 69-year-old captain was still in his underpants.As students felt the ship shuddering and wondered whether it was sinking, a crew member came onto the intercom, urging students to stay put.