At least 70 people have been killed in northern Syria after being exposed to a toxic gas that survivors said was dropped from warplanes, an attack that sparked comparisons to the most infamous act of the country’s six-year war.
Theresa May said she was appalled by reports of the attack and called for an investigation by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Jerry Smith, the operations chief of the UN-led team that supervised the removal of Syria’s sarin stockpiles following the gas attack on the rebel-held Ghouta area of Damascus four years ago, said: “This absolutely reeks of 2013 all over again.” In that attack, more than 1,300 people were killed.
Chemical weapons attacks in Syria may normalise war crimes, experts warn Read more
“President Obama said in 2012 that he would establish a ‘red line’ against the use of chemical weapons and then did nothing.”
He pointed out that Obama had set down a “red line” in 2012 on the use of chemical weapons in Syria, but argued that Obama then “did nothing” when the Assad regime carried out a mass gas attack against the town of Ghouta in August 2013.
The families are connected by marriage and both come from Khan Sheikhoun, the village in rebel-held Idlib Province that residents said had been hit with chemical weapons earlier that morning.
On Tuesday, Mr. Assad appeared to unleash one of the worst chemical attacks of the war.
“If Donald Trump is happy for this to happen to his own people and his own children,” said Mr. Youssef, “then we’re happy to keep Bashar al-Assad.”
The government of Mr. Assad, who renounced chemical weapons nearly four years ago after a large chemical attack that American intelligence agencies concluded was carried out by his forces, denied that his military had been responsible, as he has done every time chemical munitions have been used in Syria.
At the same time, Mr. Trump’s spokesman, Sean Spicer, denounced Mr. Obama for having failed to make good on his famous “red line” statement in 2012, suggesting he would intervene militarily in Syria if Mr. Assad used chemical weapons.
But in August 2013, Mr. Trump exhorted Mr. Obama not to intervene after a chemical weapons attack near Damascus that American intelligence attributed to the Syrian military killed more than 1,400 civilians, including hundreds of children, according to United States government estimates at the time.
“President Obama, do not attack Syria,” Mr. Trump said on Twitter.
Tillerson, who had said that Mr. Assad’s fate “will be decided by the Syrian people,” struck a sharply different tone on Tuesday, urging Mr. Assad’s allies Russia and Iran “to exercise their influence over the Syrian regime and to guarantee that this sort of horrific attack never happens again.”
While chlorine gas attacks have become almost routine in northern Syria, this one was different, medical workers and witnesses said.
"Today's chemical attack in Syria against innocent people, including women and children, is reprehensible and cannot be ignored by the civilized world," US President Donald Trump said, adding that he thinks the attacks was a consequence of the past administration's weakness and irresolution.
Horrific reports of chemical weapons attack in #Idlib #Syria.
The tweet was in reference to a 2013 chemical attack on the Damascus suburb of Ghouta, which was blamed on the Syrian regime and prompted US President Barack Obama to threaten military action.
Referring to the 2013 chemical attack, McCain told CNN: "We've seen this movie before, it was when Barack Obama said they would have a red line, they crossed it and he did nothing.
"The regime has been systematically using small scale (chemical) attacks over a long time in order to normalize the use of those attacks," said Haid, an associate fellow at Chatham House, an international policy think tank based in London.
A US intelligence official said the attack reportedly killed 58 people, including 11 children.
"If the Assad regime was indeed responsible for perpetrating this attack, the reported casualty figures would make it the biggest incident like this since the Syrian regime sarin attack in August 2013 against the Damascus suburbs."