“I think the key lesson is that the benefits of storing nuclear weapons in Turkey are minimal but the risks have increased significantly over the past five years,” said Hans Kristensen, a nuclear weapons expert at the Federation of American Scientists.
Ian Kearns, the director of the European Leadership Network thinktank, said: “If they are stationed at a place base that intelligence suggests is a target of terrorists attacks and prone to instability, it is no longer reasonable to keep them there.”
“The coup attempt has Gülenist fingerprints all over it,” said a Turkish government source, who asked to remain anonymous.
“The government has come out and said it’s a group of Gülenists,” said Aydıntaşbaş.
“The putschists knew that they would lose their official titles within weeks,” the government source said, “so they had to act quickly.”Unclear if strikes would be punitive and limited or the beginning of campaign to oust Bashar al-Assad after change in tone from Trump administration
The Pentagon is to present options to Donald Trump for a military strike on Bashar al-Assad after outrage over the latest chemical weapons attack in Idlib appears to have prompted a change of heart about the Syrian president.
And with the acts he has taken it would seem there is no role for him to govern the Syrian people.” As recently as last week, Tillerson had said that Assad’s future would “be decided by the Syrian people”.
Senior US military commanders have long sounded warnings over involving the US in Syria’s grueling, multifaceted civil war, but the Pentagon is now said to be considering a range of options for standoff missile strikes against Assad regime targets.
Tillerson alluded to US intelligence, which Trump has in the past publicly distrusted, leaving no doubt of Assad’s culpability for a sarin gas attack in Idlib that killed more than 80 people, including children.
Tillerson said it was very important for the Russian government “to consider carefully their continued support for the Assad regime”, which in 2015 led to Russia’s first military operation far from its borders in a generation.
Asked about possible military action, he said: “We are considering an appropriate response for this chemical weapons attack, which violates all previous UN resolutions and violates international norms and long-held agreements between parties including the Syrian regime, the Russian government and all other members of the UNSC.”
Trump last year warned that attacking Assad, who has called the US president a “natural ally”, risked starting “world war III” with Russia.
While it does not directly apportion blame, the resolution requires the Syrian military to hand over to UN investigators flight logs for its pilots from 4 April, the day of the attack, as well as the names of helicopter squadron commanders, and provide access to air bases suspected of being the launchpad for the chemical attacks.
Obama in late summer of 2013 threatened military strikes on Assad’s first chemical weapons attack, only to fail to win congressional support and for Russia to unexpectedly broker an 11th-hour deal to spirit away chemical weapons stockpiles.
“Under international law, he has zero right to attack Assad,” said Mary Ellen O’Connell, an international law scholar at the University of Notre Dame.
“I think what happened in Syria is a disgrace to humanity, and he’s there, and I guess he’s running things, so I guess something should happen,” Trump said.Calls on Russia to restrain Syrian ally increase after Turkey says postmortems confirm uses of chemical weapons
Vladimir Putin has doubled down on his support for the Syrian government despite the release of postmortem results by Turkey that confirmed chemical weapons were used in an attack that killed at least 72 people in north Syria.
The Russian president attacked “groundless accusations” that Damascus was responsible for the assault, and called for a “detailed and unbiased investigation” into the deaths, a Kremlin statement said.
Russia’s defence ministry has argued that Syrian planes were destroying chemical weapons, not deploying them, and said the airstrikes targeted a rebel storage depot for toxins.
As firm evidence of chemical weapons use mounted – along with calls for Russia to restrain the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad – Putin’s spokesman attempted to put some distance between the two allies.
“Unconditional support is not possible in this current world,” Dmitry Peskov told Associated Press, adding that Russia could not control the Syrian leader.
Asked for proof, he said Russia’s military presence in Syria mean t it had “more wide information” about what was “going on there”.
He told reporters: “[The UK is] consulting urgently with allies now to see how we can get Russia, which supports the Syrian regime, to put proper pressure on President Assad to stop these attacks once and for all .”
Western nations have been frustrated by the UN’s failure to respond to the attack – devastating even by the standards of a brutal civil war – because Russia has deployed its veto in the UN security council to protect Assad’s government from censure.
Britain, France and the US have asked the security council to hold a vote later on Thursday on a resolution demanding an investigation of the suspected chemical attack in Syria, diplomats said.
Turkey on Thursday said the first conclusive evidence of the use of chemical weapons had been found in three victims of the Tuesday, who had died in Turkish hospitals after being brought from Syria for treatment.
The postmortems were conducted by officials from the World Health Organization in Adana, southern Turkey, along with officials from the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Bozdağ said.
Later Turkey’s health ministry said 31 people injured in the attack who had been taken across the border showed signs of being exposed to the nerve agent sarin.
“Evidence was detected in patients which leads one to think they were exposed to a chemical substance [sarin],” the ministry said in a statement.
The medical results from Turkey came as the Syrian foreign minister denied his government used chemical weapons in the attack.
He also denied Syria had ever used them, even though reports from UN investigators have confirmed previous chemical attacks by both the Syrian government and Islamic State forces.
Speaking to reporters in Damascus, Walid al-Muallem said: “The Syrian Arab Army has never used chemical weapons and will not use chemical weapons against Syrians and even against terrorists.”
On Wednesday, Donald Trump accused Assad’s government of going “beyond a red line” by conducting the attack which he said was an “affront to humanity”.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Protesters shout slogans against Russia near its consulate in Istanbul, Turkey, after a chemical attack killed scores of people including children in Idlib, Syria, on Tuesday.
Syria chemical attack has changed my view of Assad, says Trump Read more
“What I would say is, all those backing that regime including Russia need to use their influence to stop Assad from bombarding and dealing with his people in such a way,” said the prime minister.
Shortly afterwards, first responders were overwhelmed with patients suffering from acute breathing problems, foaming at the mouth and writhing in pain.The only reminder of what happened is a small, blackened, crater near the northern part of town, where a rocket laced with a nerve agent fell, killing more than 70 people in one of the worst mass casualty chemical attacks in the six-year war in Syria.
Moscow, Bashar al-Assad’s principal backer in the war, said the Syrian government had bombed a rebel-run toxic gas manufacturing plant in Khan Sheikhun, and that the gas had subsequently leaked out.
“You can look at it ; there’s nothing there except maybe some grain and animal dung, and there’s even a dead goat there that suffocated in the attack,” one person said.
The US military has launched a cruise missile attack on a Syrian airfield in response to Bashar al-Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons this week, marking the first time the US has become a direct combatant against the Syrian regime.
Donald Trump launches 60 missiles in US strike after Syria chemical attack – live Read more
Syrian officials said at least seven people were killed and nine wounded in US missile attack.
Russia’s foreign minister said no Russian service personnel were hurt in the strike.
Speaking during a trip to Uzbekistan, Sergei Lavrov said the strike was launched on an “absolutely made-up pretext”, adding: “It reminds me of the situation in 2003 when the United States and Britain, along with some of their allies, attacked Iraq.”
He said Russia would demand Washington explain why it conducted the strikes.
Donald Trump, who for years signalled he was comfortable with Assad remaining in power, abruptly switched course after seeing images of children gassed to death in Idlib province after Assad used chemical weapons against Syrian civilians.
An airbase at Shayrat, near Homs, was targeted, signalling a limited initial engagement on a target the military said was used to launch the chemical attack.
The president said on Thursday night at his Mar-a-Lago resort that he had ordered a “targeted military strike on the airfield in Syria from where the chemical attack was launched”.
After a frantic day of consultation with his military advisers, including the defense secretary, James Mattis, and the national security adviser, HR McMaster, Trump said it was a “vital national security interest” of the US to prevent “the spread and use of deadly chemical weapons” after previous efforts to change Assad’s behavior “had failed, and failed very dramatically”.
For its part, the Pentagon said the strike “was intended to deter the regime from using chemical weapons again”.
Vladimir Putin’s spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said in a statement carried by Russian news agencies that the president believed the US had carried out the strikes under a “far-fetched pretext”.
Russia has argued that the death of civilians in Khan Sheikhun resulted from Syrian forces hitting a rebel chemical arsenal there, but the Guardian visited the attack site and found no evidence for this claim.
Dozens of civilians, including 10 children, were killed, apparently by a chemical attack on Khan Sheikhun, in a region held by rebels who oppose Assad’s regime.
Syria’s formidable, Russian-supplied air defences, largely along the Mediterranean coast, have long prompted US military officials to warn against attacking Assad.
However, according to the Pentagon spokesman Capt Jeff Davis, the US military notified Russian forces before the strike, using a communications channel set up to ensure US pilots who attacked Islamic State targets in eastern Syria did not accidentally come into conflict with their Russian counterparts.
“Initial indications are that this strike has severely damaged or destroyed Syrian aircraft and support infrastructure and equipment at Shayrat airfield, reducing the Syrian government’s ability to deliver chemical weapons.”
Davis said the airbase had been used to store chemical weapons used by the regime until 2013, when a deal was struck with the US and Russia to remove its declared arsenal.
Davis said precautions were taken to avoid killing Russian personnel on their compound at Shayrat, citing the timing of the attack and the choice of targets unlikely to have people inside.
All the aircraft attacked were Syrian, he said.
For years, Trump rejected any attack on Assad as a strategic folly, despite repeated chemical assaults of the sort that prompted Thursday’s missile strikes.
After Russia’s intervention in the conflict, Trump said rival Hillary Clinton’s openness to strikes against Assad’s forces were inviting conflict with Russia.
But earlier on Thursday, after Trump’s public anger at Assad for the chemical assault, the secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, said there was “no role for [Assad] to govern the Syrian people” and called on Russia, where Tillerson will travel next week, to “consider carefully” its sponsorship of the Syrian dictator.
Trump and the military “sent an important message the United States will no longer stand idly by as Assad, aided and abetted by Putin’s Russia, slaughters innocent Syrians with chemical weapons and barrel bombs”, the two Republican senators said in a joint statement.
The senior Democrat on the Senate foreign relations committee, Ben Cardin, joined in support, but said: “Any longer-term or larger military operation in Syria by the Trump administration will need to be done in consultation with the Congress.
“Military planners took precautions to minimize risk to Russian or Syrian personnel located at the airfield,” he said.
No Russian aircraft were at the base, military officials said.
“Initial indications are that this strike has severely damaged or destroyed Syrian aircraft and support infrastructure and equipment at Shayrat airfield, reducing the Syrian government’s ability to deliver chemical weapons.”
Administration officials described the strikes Mr. Trump ordered as a graphic message to the world that the president was no longer willing to stand idly by as Mr. Assad used horrific weapons in his country’s long civil war.
To do otherwise, they said, would be to essentially bless the use of chemical weapons by Mr. Assad and others who might use them.
He said Mr. Trump had concluded after seeing the results of the chemical attack that the United States could no longer “turn away, turn a blind eye.”
“The more we fail to respond to the use of these weapons, the more we begin to normalize their use,” Mr. Tillerson said, a thinly veiled reference to President Barack Obama’s decision to refrain from strikes in 2013.
After being briefed on the chemical attack shortly after it occurred, American intelligence agencies and their allies worked quickly to confirm the source of the chemical weapons, administration officials said.
R. McMaster, the president’s national security adviser, to weigh the risk of action against the “risk of this continued, egregious, inhumane attacks on innocent civilians with chemical weapons.”
A military official said the attack was at the more limited end of the military options presented to Mr. Trump on Thursday by Defense Secretary Jim Mattis.
The official said the strike was intended to send a signal to Mr. Assad about the United States’ intention to use military force if he continues to use chemical weapons.
Mr. McMaster said the missile strikes would not eliminate Mr. Assad’s ability to use chemical weapons, but would degrade it.
He said the military had also sought to “minimize risk” to citizens of other countries — specifically Russians — who might have been in the area at the time.
The speed with which the Trump administration responded — and remarks earlier in the day by American officials who said that options were still being considered — appeared intended to maximize the element of surprise, and contrasted sharply with the Obama administration’s methodical scrutiny of a military response.
Two Republican senators, John McCain of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, praised the strike in a statement and called for Mr. Trump to go further: to “take Assad’s air force — which is responsible not just for the latest chemical weapons attack, but countless atrocities against the Syrian people — completely out of the fight.”
Administration officials said the strike was intended to put Mr. Tillerson in a position to tell the Russians that they should use their leverage to ensure that Mr. Assad’s government does not carry out more chemical weapon strikes and to facilitate a diplomatic resolution to the civil war in Syria.
As recently as this week, before seeing images of dying children gasping for breath during the chemical attack, Mr. Trump and his top aides hardly appeared inclined to more forcefully assert American power in the country.
“We ask for God’s wisdom as we face the challenge of our very troubled world,” Mr. Trump said solemnly.
“It makes us feel that we are defeated,” said Dr. Khalil, whose gums bled after he was exposed to scores of chemical victims on Tuesday.
“I stress to you once again: The Syrian Army has not, did not and will not use this kind of weapons — not just against our own people, but even against the terrorists that attack our civilians with their mortar rounds,” the minister, Walid al-Moallem, said in Damascus.
But the denial, as well as a Russian assertion that a bomb hit a chemical weapons depot controlled by the rebels, seemed perfunctory, almost without regard to the facts, which Western governments said pointed to a Syrian government hand.
Critics of President Barack Obama, including President Trump, say that his decision not to enforce his “red line” on chemical attacks in 2013 convinced the Assad government it could get away with anything, and that it has been escalating its harsh tactics against civilians ever since.
Russia said it entered to fight the Islamic State, but directed most of its strikes at places farther west, like Idlib, where rival insurgents more urgently threatened government forces.
Chlorine attacks continued — investigators from the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations concluded the government had carried out at least three in 2014 and 2015 — with little international reaction.
And then Thursday — before dawn on Friday in Syria — Mr. Trump ordered the attack on the Shayrat air base, from which, he said, the chemical attack was launched.
The Turkish statement said the sarin conclusion had been based on autopsies on three victims performed at Turkey’s Adana Forensic Medicine Institution with the participation of representatives from the World Health Organization and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, a group based in The Hague that monitors compliance with the global treaty that bans such munitions.
Mr. Assad’s government signed that treaty less than four years ago and agreed to give up its chemical arsenal after the first major chemical weapons attack in Syria, which left hundreds dead near Damascus.
It led President Barack Obama to threaten a direct military intervention in the conflict — an option he abandoned when Mr. Assad agreed to sign the chemical weapons ban.
“I stress to you once again: The Syrian Army has not, did not and will not use this kind of weapons — not just against our own people, but even against the terrorists that attack our civilians with their mortar rounds,” the minister, Walid al-Moallem, said at a news conference in Damascus.
Mr. Moallem repeated an explanation, which experts say is implausible, that the toxic substances were dispersed after the Syrian Army had conducted an 11:30 a.m. air raid on an insurgent depot that he said contained chemical weapons.
Some officials including President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey have said the attack killed more than 100 people.
Unicef said in a statement on Thursday that 546 people were injured, “among them many children.”
“If the Syrian regime knew that there were chemical weapons in the warehouse, it should have also known that it should not have attacked it,” he said.
In Russia, officials said the case against Mr. Assad was far from clear.
“The use of chemical weapons is absolutely inadmissible,” Mr. Peskov said, adding that the Syrian Army must act to “prevent any chemical agents that can be used as weapons from falling into the terrorists’ hands.”
Later on Thursday, however, Mr. Peskov said that the Russian government supported a full investigation into the attack and that the Kremlin’s support for Mr. Assad’s government was “not unconditional.”
The Russian-Syrian posture came under immediate attack from Western leaders, including President Trump, who had urged his predecessor, Mr. Obama, in 2013 not to intervene in Syria.
On Wednesday, Mr. Trump said that the chemical attack had “crossed a lot of lines for me,” and added, “My attitude toward Syria and Assad has changed very much.” He did not specify his plans.
France, Britain and the United States have circulated a draft resolution at the United Nations Security Council condemning the attack and demanding Syria’s cooperation — including access to all military flight logs of Syrian aircraft operating in Idlib during the attack.
“These crimes must not remain unpunished,” he said, adding, “One day, international justice will rule on Assad.”Story highlights "That air force is the cause of most of these civilian deaths," Clinton said
(CNN) Hillary Clinton called on the United States to take out Syrian leader Bashar al-Assad's Air Force on Thursday, days after a chemical attack killed more than 70 people in the war-torn country.
"Assad has an air force, and that air force is the cause of most of these civilian deaths as we have seen over the years and as we saw again in the last few days," Clinton said in a speech at the "Women in the World" summit in New York City.
US officials said Assad perpetrated the chemical attack this week that killed more than 70 people.
He arrived here at the Reyhanli State Hospital 24 hours ago, one of around 30 Syrians rushed to this southern Turkish town near the Syrian border after what appears to have been a chemical attack by Syrian warplanes on rebel-held Khan Shaikhoun in Idlib province.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's military categorically denied using chemical weapons and blamed "terrorist" groups for the carnage.
“I wish the US government took this step earlier when chemical weapons were used in Syria,” said Abdulqader.
“Nontheless we believe Trump’s action will force those who believe in the use of chemical weapons to think twice next time.”Using satellite tracking and other surveillance tools, the Pentagon said it had concluded that Syrian warplanes dumped outlawed chemical bombs most likely containing sarin nerve agent on Khan Sheikhoun.
Acting on Mr. Trump’s orders, American warships launched Tomahawk missiles that struck the Al Shayrat airfield, where the planes were based — the first direct attack on Mr. Assad’s forces by the United States since the war began.
(CNN) President Donald Trump has said that the horrific images from a chemical weapons attack in Syria compelled him to authorize a missile strike against an Assad-regime airbase last week.
The west has blamed the Syrian air force for the attack on Khan Sheikhun area in southern Idlib on 4 April to which Donald Trump responded with cruise missile attacks that led to the destruction of more than 20 Syrian warplanes.
It was the most decisive US military intervention since the war began, and raised the question of whether America will launch fresh attacks if evidence of further chemical weapons emerges.
The Treaty of Friendship and Co-operation – by which Russia rents its naval base at Sevastopol from the Ukrainian government – is so far-reaching in the rights it gives the Russians to exercise their military powers that it is seen by many in Ukraine to undermine the country's independence.
It has also been alleged that Sevastopol has served as the main source in supplying the Assad regime during Syria's civil war and proved useful with Russia's role in dismantling Syria's chemical weapons last year.
After Syria's civil war forced Russia to stop using its naval base in the Syrian port of Tartus last year, Sevastopol became even more crucial.
"The plan and the commitment to the Russian government is for this to be spread out over time in legacy format to each of the 80 regions in Russia and that's a fantastic dream of ours to be able to influence and transform the biggest nation in the world," he said.
MOSCOW — Russia’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs was not amused by the unorthodox statement from the State Department under the title “President Putin’s Fiction: 10 False Claims About Ukraine,” which rebutted a series of assertions by the Russian president in the eye-catching format of a top-10 list.
“This is obviously Russia, not Ukraine,” Ms. Neverova said later in an interview.
Asked where he was from, a masked soldier at the airport said he was with the Russian infantry and had been sent to Crimea a week ago on a mission to protect the region “against the enemy, Ukraine.”“It is certainly harder for the White House, State Department and intelligence community to find up-and-coming regional experts who are truly expert on that region,” said Strobe Talbott, the president of the Brookings Institution and President Bill Clinton’s Russia point man.
“When the Russians talk to the Obama administration, they want someone who they know speaks on behalf of the president personally,” said Andrew S.
During his time in Russia, Mr. McFaul said, American indifference bothered the Russians.
“When we’ve all retired, 10, 20 years down the road, I don’t know how many people will be left with this area of expertise,” said Ms. Stent of Georgetown University, who just published “The Limits of Partnership: U.S.-Russian Relations in the Twenty-First Century.” “And we can’t assume that our relationship with Russia won’t suddenly command a lot of attention.
The referendum follows the lightning chain of events in Ukraine in previous weeks that included increasingly violent protests against the government, the country's pro-Russian President fleeing across the border, and then Russian troops seizing what amounts to military control of Crimea -- where Russia's Black Sea fleet is based.
Russia says the political upheaval in Ukraine that forced out President Viktor Yanukovych ended the Kiev government's constitutional authority.
Power said that if the referendum goes forward, the result would get little recognition beyond Russia.
Asked if Crimea and perhaps other parts of eastern and southern Ukraine that favor Russia might end up the same, Power said: "I think it's maybe not helpful to talk about precedents."
A Ukrainian worker must think carefully before answering his boss' question: "Are you for Ukraine or for Russia?" European military observers, invited by the Ukrainian government, are stopped at a checkpoint by armed and masked men, one of whom says in Russian: "I've been ordered by the government of Crimea not to let anyone in."
"It does not follow that if Crimea votes to join Russia, that anyone will accept it," he said.
"For Russia to start cherry-picking bits of the former Soviet Union, cranking up referenda in Kazakhstan or Latvia or wherever you like, to try to carve off bits, would be against international law, and it would be something (that Russian President) Vladimir Putin has said he doesn't want to do."
Putin's office said the call -- initiated by Obama -- "revealed differences in approaches and assessments of the causes of the crisis and the current situation." He also voiced Russia's view it "cannot ignore calls for help" from eastern and southeastern Ukraine, before concluding that Lavrov and Kerry "will continue intensive contacts."
"Any further steps by the Russian Federation to destabilize the situation in Ukraine would lead to additional and far reaching consequences for relations in a broad range of economic areas," EU leaders said, having also threatened travels bans on certain Russians and the freezing of some assets.
Now, most people here support the new government and oppose Russian intervention, as well as the prospect of Crimea becoming part of Russia.
Alex Shiroki, from Yalta, said that his boss asked him, point-blank, "Are you for Ukraine or for Russia?" While his boss favors the latter, Shiroki does not, saying he'd probably leave if Crimea ends up splitting from Ukraine.
"For Russia to start cherry-picking bits of the former Soviet Union, cranking up referenda in Kazakhstan or Latvia or wherever you like, to try to carve off bits, would be against international law," Crawford said, "And it would be something Vladimir Putin has said he doesn't want to do."
Obama's latest remarks came more than a month after President Donald Trump authorized a strike against a Syrian air base in April in response to a chemical weapons attack carried out by Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's regime.
US warships launched 59 Tomahawk cruise missiles at a Syrian government air base, the first time the US has directly attacked the Assad regime in the country's six-year civil war.
Instead, the Obama administration reached a deal with Russia -- a Syrian ally -- on a framework to eliminate Syria's chemical weapons.
The chemical attack against Assad's own citizens in Syria was the Obama administration's fault, White House press secretary Sean Spicer said, declaring it a "consequence of the past administration's weakness and irresolution."
Moscow has denounced the events that led to Yanukovych's ouster as an illegitimate coup and has refused to recognize the new Ukrainian authorities, putting the two countries on a collision course over control of the Crimea, a peninsula on the Black Sea that has long ties to Russia and has thousands of Russian troops stationed there.
The diplomats' bosses, Obama and Putin, talked for an hour Thursday afternoon, with the U.S. president stating "Russia's actions are in violation of Ukraine's sovereignty" and that there is a diplomatic way out, according to the White House.