(CNN) Forces loyal to Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan quashed a coup attempt by some members of the military that began Friday evening and devolved into turmoil and violence.
“Most of the people who went out in the streets to oppose the coup d’état did not use democratic language,” said Ozgur Unluhisarcikli, the director of the Ankara office of the German Marshall Fund of the United States, a research organization.
Turkish state broadcaster TRT says it has been taken over by members of the military who were part of the coup attempt.
: Hours after the attempted coup against him began, : Hours after the attempted coup against him began, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan addresses the nation via FaceTime.
Saturday, 2:51 a.m.: The Turkish National Intelligence unit claims the coup is over.
JUST WATCHED Turkey has a long history of military coups Replay More Videos ...
MUST WATCH Turkey has a long history of military coups 00:56
Turkey's deputy prime minister, Mehmet Simsek, tells CNN by phone that the government is in full control after a failed coup attempt.
12:20 p.m.: Prime Minister Binali Yildirim tells a news conference the attempted coup is a "stain on democracy".
7:30 p.m.: Erdogan speaks to another cheering, flag-waving crowd, blaming the coup attempt on rival Fethullah Gulen, a cleric and former ally who lives in exile in Pennsylvania.
"This country suffered a lot in the hands of the Gulen movement," Erdogan declares.Facebook Twitter Pinterest The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, addresses the crowd who gathered in front of his residence in Kisikli to protest against the failed military coup attempt in Istanbul.
Turkey has demanded their return to stand trial for participation in Friday’s coup attempt.
“The coup attempt did a lot of damage to the democratic opposition in Turkey,” said one human rights lawyer.
“Instead of channelling the overwhelming support it has received from across the political spectrum to unite the nation, the government is exploiting a failed coup to silence the critical press when Turkey most needs pluralistic media,” said Nina Ognianova, regional co-ordinator for the group.
“We are here because our compatriots in Germany are standing up for democracy and against the attempted military coup in Turkey,” said Turkey’s sports minister, Akif Çağatay Kılıç, who was at the rally.
Earlier on Sunday, state media reported that 1,400 military personnel had been dismissed over suspected links to the exiled cleric Fethullah Gülen – blamed by the Turkish government for the attempted coup.
The number of public sector workers removed from their posts since the coup attempt is now at more than 66,000, including about 43,000 people in education, the Anadolu state-run news agency reported on Friday.
Erdoğan’s Justice and Development party (AKP) received 60% of the vote from Germany in last November’s election, a bigger share than in Turkey.You've probably heard that the Turkish government's attempt to ban Twitter quickly collapsed into farce.
Turkey's Twitter-banning prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, came to power after a big election win in 2002.