In total, North Korea has fired 21 missiles during 14 tests since February , further perfecting its technology with each launch.
Though the meeting is on the agenda, it's not clear what the Security Council can do to stop North Korea firing off missiles.
North Korea drew a swift rebuke from the international community after successfully testing two intercontinental missiles in July, which experts say may eventually be able to deliver a nuclear warhead to the US mainland.
Japan's Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga said Friday, "it is extremely important to keep pressuring North Korea in coordination with US, South Korea and other countries."
When it comes to the progress of Pyongyang's nuclear program, US military commanders are already operating under the assumption that North Korea has the ability to miniaturize a nuclear warhead in order place it atop a missile -- an assessment that many independent nuclear scientists share.
The report comes the same month the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed a new round of sanctions on North Korea in response to the testing of two ballistic missiles in July that experts say may be able to reach the United States.
"The United Nations Security Council just voted 15-0 to sanction North Korea.
MUST WATCH What Trump has said about North Korea 02:05
Though China voted in favor of the UN sanctions, the country has long said it's opposed to unilateral measures to punish North Korea like the Japanese announced Friday.
Others worry economic pressure may not be enough, as North Korea sees the ability to successfully strike the Untied States with a nuclear weapon as the only viable way to prevent any American led attempts at regime change.
North Korea has long said unless the United States abandons its "hostile policy" toward Pyongyang, it will continue ahead with its nuclear program.
"Unless a definite end is put to the US hostile policy and nuclear threat, the DPRK will never flinch even an inch from the road of bolstering up the nuclear forces already chosen by itself," a North Korean delegation said at a disarmament conference in Geneva, North Korean state media reported Friday.North Korea’s missiles can be stopped – but not by ‘fire and fury’ | John Nilsson-Wright Read more
Obama and Park had warned Pyongyang it could face strengthened sanctions if it detonated a fourth nuclear device, after North Korea said it could carry out a new kind of test.
But “we should not act out of emotions and push North Korea into a dead end,” Mr. Putin said, according to dispatches from South Korean reporters.
Why North Korea wants nukes and missiles North Korea has long maintained it wants nuclear weapons and long-range missiles to deter the United States from attempting to overthrow the regime of Kim Jong Un. Pyongyang looks at states such as Iraq -- where Saddam Hussein was overthrown by the United States, and Libya -- its late leader, Moammar Gadhafi, gave up his nuclear ambitions for sanctions relief and aid, only to be toppled and killed after the United States intervened in his country's civil unrest -- and believes that only being able to threaten the US mainland with a retaliatory nuclear strike can stop American military intervention.
Many experts say they believe North Korea would not use the weapons first.
Japan already has a number of defensive options to deal with a missile fired out of North Korea, experts say.
Considering this history and its continuing missile launches and nuclear tests, more dialogue with North Korea would be a dead end.
Submarines in the fleets of Japan, South Korea and North Korea are not powered by nuclear reactors, but rather by a combination of gas turbines, diesels and/or electric engines.
North Korea, South Korea and Japan also operate frigates.