North Korea drew a swift rebuke from the international community after successfully testing two intercontinental missiles in July, which experts say may eventually be able to deliver a nuclear warhead to the US mainland.
The report comes the same month the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed a new round of sanctions on North Korea in response to the testing of two ballistic missiles in July that experts say may be able to reach the United States.
"The United Nations Security Council just voted 15-0 to sanction North Korea.
MUST WATCH What Trump has said about North Korea 02:05
Though China voted in favor of the UN sanctions, the country has long said it's opposed to unilateral measures to punish North Korea like the Japanese announced Friday.
North Korea has long said unless the United States abandons its "hostile policy" toward Pyongyang, it will continue ahead with its nuclear program.
Donald Trump’s offer to allow Japan and South Korea to buy “highly sophisticated military equipment” from the US has triggered speculation that Washington might be on the point of relaxing some of the few remaining restrictions on arms sales in the region, in the wake of North Korea’s sixth nuclear test.
(About 67 percent of South Koreans polled said that South Korea should get such weapons.) The nuclearization of Japan — or South Korea — would undermine nonproliferation efforts, as well as validate North Korea’s nuclear brinkmanship to date.
It was the 15th missile test by North Korea this year and the first since North Korea detonated its most powerful nuclear bomb to date on Sept.
Zhao said, in an effort to deter North Korea, Japan could provoke an arms race in East Asia with South Korea, China and even Russia.
Considering this history and its continuing missile launches and nuclear tests, more dialogue with North Korea would be a dead end.
How could North Korea relentlessly pursue missile development and nuclear tests over almost half a century?
According to the United Nations, foreign-made parts have been used in North Korea’s ballistic missiles.
In response, Japan, the United States and South Korea engaged in dialogue with North Korea and agreed to construct two light-water reactors and to provide heavy fuel oil in exchange for freezing and ultimately dismantling its nuclear program.
China and Russia then joined Japan, the United States and South Korea to create the six-party talks with the North.