Japan's Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga said Friday, "it is extremely important to keep pressuring North Korea in coordination with US, South Korea and other countries."
The report comes the same month the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed a new round of sanctions on North Korea in response to the testing of two ballistic missiles in July that experts say may be able to reach the United States.
"The United Nations Security Council just voted 15-0 to sanction North Korea.
MUST WATCH What Trump has said about North Korea 02:05
Though China voted in favor of the UN sanctions, the country has long said it's opposed to unilateral measures to punish North Korea like the Japanese announced Friday.
North Korea has long said unless the United States abandons its "hostile policy" toward Pyongyang, it will continue ahead with its nuclear program.
-- Trump took to Twitter after the announcement and said North Korea's "words and actions continue to be very hostile and dangerous to the United States." He added that Pyongyang has become a "great threat and embarrassment to China, which is trying to help but with little success"; warned South Korea their "talk of appeasement with North Korea will not work"; and said Washington is considering "stopping all trade with any country doing business with North Korea."
He said the United States would bring “fire and fury” to the North if it was threatened, and Sunday’s nuclear test, claimed by the North to be a hydrogen bomb, was accompanied by North Korea’s announcement that the weapon could be fitted on a missile that could reach the United States.
(About 67 percent of South Koreans polled said that South Korea should get such weapons.) The nuclearization of Japan — or South Korea — would undermine nonproliferation efforts, as well as validate North Korea’s nuclear brinkmanship to date.
Zhao said, in an effort to deter North Korea, Japan could provoke an arms race in East Asia with South Korea, China and even Russia.
but the tense conditions are not just about North Korea but about China and the US as well," he said.In the early 1990s, North Korea’s announcement to withdraw from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and the International Atomic Energy Agency was a wake-up call.
In response, Japan, the United States and South Korea engaged in dialogue with North Korea and agreed to construct two light-water reactors and to provide heavy fuel oil in exchange for freezing and ultimately dismantling its nuclear program.
China and Russia then joined Japan, the United States and South Korea to create the six-party talks with the North.
Considering this history and its continuing missile launches and nuclear tests, more dialogue with North Korea would be a dead end.