Britain’s decision to leave the EU continued to reverberate around the financial markets as several Asian governments prepared stimulus packages and some analysts warned that global markets were bracing for a full-blown recession in the UK.
Days after the UK referendum result wiped almost 8% off Japanese shares and sent the yen up sharply against the US dollar, officials in Tokyo have started drawing up plans to minimise Brexit’s impact on the world’s third-biggest economy.
“There are concerns about lessening the impact of the British referendum on Japan’s small and medium-sized companies,” Ishihara said.
David Donabedian, chief investment officer of Atlantic Trust Private Wealth Management, said: “Markets already appear to be pricing in a full-blown recession in the UK and rising recession risk in the rest of Europe.”
South Korea’s government said on Tuesday it would propose a supplementary budget shield of around 10 trillion won ($8.44bn), with Brexit turmoil as well as domestic risks seen as weighing on its decision-making.
The Chinese premier, Li Keqiang, said on Tuesday that the government would not allow “rollercoaster rides and drastic changes in the capital markets” in the wake of Brexit turmoil that took the yuan to five and a half year lows.
The British prime minister, David Cameron, insisted on Monday that Britain’s vote to leave the European Union would not send the economy into a tailspin, even as Standard & Poor’s stripped the UK of its top credit rating.
Cameron, who is resigning as prime minister over the EU referendum outcome, will travel to Brussels on Tuesday to discuss the Brexit vote with Europe’s leaders.
The UK’s challenge to build a clean, secure and affordable energy system has become significantly harder amid the political and economic turmoil following the nation’s vote to leave the European Union.
“It is vital the UK retains access to the IEM, which provides stability for energy companies and helps keep household bills down,” said a spokeswoman.
Collaboration with other European countries on energy matters is important for UK consumers,” it said in a statement.
The costs of reduced collaboration could be high, according to research by Vivid Economics, published ahead of the vote: “The potential impacts resulting from exclusion from the IEM could be up to £500m per year by the early 2020s.” The analysts said further costs would come from investors demanding higher returns as the risks to projects rise.
Brexit was a “superb result” for the UK, she said.
Prof Paul Younger, at the University of Glasgow, said the vote to leave “blasts a hole” in the embryonic EU energy union, which would provide a huge market for the UK’s large offshore wind and tidal resources, as well as smooth out the intermittency of rising renewable energy.
The first must be confirmation of the 5th carbon budget, which will hopefully give some confidence in the long-term direction of UK energy policy.” Under UK law, the government has until Thursday to accept or reject the latest carbon-cutting proposals from its own climate advisers.
The chancellor George Osborne warned on Monday that the impact of the Brexit vote was already being felt: “It is already evident that some firms are continuing to pause their decisions to invest.” A survey of its members by the business group the Institute of Directors found one in five were considering moving some UK operations abroad.
The plant is an important part of the UK government’s plan to keep the lights on and emissions down, but is at high risk from a change of leadership, said energy analyst Nick Butler: “Osborne has been a powerful supporter of new nuclear.
“We still want to grow in the UK, particularly in wind power, but clearly a significant change like an exit from the EU introduces more risk to the sector for an unforeseen period of time,” said a spokesman for Vattenfall.
But he said the global surge in clean energy and action on climate change provided very strong reasons for the UK follow suit, even from outside the EU.
Jonathan Gaventa, from thinktank E3G, said that legal EU targets for renewable energy for 2020 had been a major catalyst for investment, but that the bloc’s 2030 target is not nationally binding: “So current UK renewable energy investment is driven by the underlying need for clean energy in the UK.
Prof Rob Gross, at Imperial College London, said one thing was certain: “What seems incontrovertible is that in the energy arena, as in so many parts of the economy which are exposed to external trade, victory for Leave creates uncertainty, risks instability, weakens the UK’s negotiating position and, at least in the short term, discourages investment.”Virgin billionaire says ‘thousands and thousands’ of jobs will be lost following the decision to leave the EU
Virgin billionaire, Sir Richard Branson, says Chinese business partners are already pulling investment from the UK in the light of the EU referendum vote, and warned that “thousands of jobs will be lost”.
Earlier in the week, Branson, who campaigned for the UK to remain in the EU, called on the government to consider holding a second referendum, “based on the misrepresentations made by the leave campaign”.
The entrepreneur does not have the right to vote in UK elections because he lives in the British Virgin Islands, but has weighed in on the Brexit debate, pointing out that he employs 50,000 people in the UK.The financial markets continued to pummel stocks and the value of the British pound, at one point sending the currency to its lowest level against the dollar in more than three decades.
Mr. Cameron has announced that he will step down, and both his governing Conservative Party and the opposition Labour Party were consumed by internal warfare on Monday, leaving the country lacking strong leadership as it confronted new demands for a referendum on independence for Scotland.
In the first meeting of Parliament since the referendum, Mr. Cameron said he considered the vote binding, though he reiterated that he would leave to his successor the decision to start the formal withdrawal process.
“So I think it is absolutely essential that we stay focused on how, in this transitional period, nobody loses their head, nobody goes off half-cocked, people don’t start ginning up scatterbrained or revengeful premises, but we look for ways to maintain the strength that will serve the interests and the values that brought us together in the first place,” Mr. Kerry said.Of European parliament members: "They don't like me.
Fresh off the boos and turned backs that greeted his appearance at the European Council earlier in the day, Farage said warnings of economic chaos following the vote won't come to pass, but suggested even if they do, it would be worth it.
U.K. Treasury chief George Osborne has no doubts: Britain will "absolutely" have to cut spending and raise taxes following its vote to leave the European Union.
The chancellor of the exchequer said ahead of the vote that an emergency budget would be needed to fill a "black hole" of about £30 billion ($42.6 billion) per year if the U.K. left the EU.
Richard Branson, the billionaire founder of Virgin Group, said his company had ditched a planned acquisition after the U.K. voted last Thursday to leave the European Union.
"When you are seeing this continuous 5% increase year over year in home prices without an accompanying increase in either wages or incomes, what can't go on forever does not," Hamrick noted.But this vote was also a rejection by my fellow countrymen, from my parents’ generation to mine, of everything I cherished about Europe, Britain and my own childhood: the sense that our differences were less important than our shared experiences.
“During the referendum campaign, I said I want my country back,” Mr. Farage said on Monday.
Sterling’s slide came amid worrying signs the UK economy is already suffering from the Brexit vote.A closely watched survey published on Tuesday showed growth in the UK services sector – which accounts for more than three quarters of the economy – was the slowest in three years in June.
• People who otherwise agree on very little — like Nigel Farage, one of the foremost advocates of a British exit from the bloc, or “Brexit,” and Andy Burnham, a senior Labour Party lawmaker — have called on the government to clarify the status of these Europeans.
Ms. Leadsom said on Tuesday that Europeans living in Britain should not be used as “bargaining chips.”
Mr. Cameron, who had supported remaining in the European Union, said after the referendum that he would resign once the governing Conservatives selected a new leader, a process that he had expected to last until September but that was drastically accelerated on Monday.
Despite being part of the Remain camp in the run-up to the referendum, May will push ahead with the UK's divorce from Europe -- "Brexit means Brexit," she said in typically no-nonsense style.
While Scotland voted to remain part of the UK in 2014, with 55% of people voting against independence, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon has now said another independence referendum could be on the table following Brexit.
“Consumers in post-Brexit Britain are reporting higher levels of concern this month,” said Joe Staton, head of market dynamics at GfK.
The report follows a clutch of business surveys this week suggesting the vote to leave the EU could derail Britain’s economy following relatively strong economic growth in the run-up to the referendum.
British Airways owner International Airlines Group has reported disappointing profits and lowered its full-year forecast, blaming terror attacks, the Brexit vote and strikes for a downturn in travel.
Willie Walsh, the IAG chief executive, said: “Numerous external factors affected our airlines, including the impact of terrorism, uncertainty around the UK’s EU referendum and Spain’s political situation, and increased weakness in Latin American economies.