Carles Puigdemont, the leader of Catalonia, assured the region’s voters that the independence referendum would take place, despite efforts by the Madrid government and Spanish courts to block it.
Separatist leaders now face fines and suspension from office if they go ahead with the referendum, which has been declared illegal by the central government in Madrid, with the support of Spanish courts.
This time, Catalonia’s government has promised that the referendum will be binding, even if it is declared illegal by Spain’s constitutional court and even if Catalan opponents of independence boycott it.
In response, Carles Puigdemont, the leader of Catalonia, told Catalan television that no politician or court in Madrid could stop the referendum.
On Friday, the Spanish government announced that it would send more police officers to Catalonia to maintain order and block a referendum; additional officers are being billeted in ferries off the Catalan coast.
BARCELONA, Spain — Separatist lawmakers declared Catalonia’s independence from Spain on Oct. 27, prompting the central government of Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy to take administrative control of the region, oust Catalan leaders and schedule elections on Dec. 21.
The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%.
Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic.
Story highlights Catalan independence referendum has stoked fierce divisions across Spain
But Spain's Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy gave Puigdemont five days to clarify whether he had made a declaration of independence or not, after which Madrid could take over the Catalan government.
The Catalan president, Carles Puigdemont, has refused to clarify whether he declared Catalonia’s independence from Spain last week, but has repeated his calls for negotiations with the Madrid government to resolve the country’s ongoing political crisis.
The announcement came minutes after Catalan President Carles Puigdemont threatened that the region could formally declare independence if the Spanish government did not engage in dialogue.
Barcelona, Spain (CNN) Catalan leaders have insisted they will reject any attempt by Madrid to impose direct rule on their autonomous region, as a political crisis escalates over Catalonia's threats to declare independence from Spain.
After the referendum, the struggle over Catalonia intensified in an often confusing exchange between the Catalan leader, Carles Puigdemont, and Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of Spain.
After weeks of equivocating, Mr. Puigdemont told the Spanish authorities that Catalan lawmakers might vote for independence.
The office of Spain's prosecutor general meanwhile confirmed it would file a lawsuit for rebellion against Puigdemont, the Catalan government and the members of the parliament board who voted in favor of independence.
• Your report (Catalan vice-president says independence is the only remaining option, 26 October) repeats yet again the claim that “770,000 votes were lost after Spanish police stepped in to try to halt the vote” during the referendum on 1 October.
Q&A Why does the Spanish government say the Catalan referendum is illegal?
Show Hide The Spanish government argues that any referendum on Catalan independence would be illegal because the country’s 1978 constitution makes no provision for a vote on self-determination.
MADRID — The former leader of Catalonia, Carles Puigdemont, will not appear on Thursday before a Spanish judge to face possible charges — including rebellion — arising from his government’s declaration of independence for the region, his Belgian lawyer said.
In the face of Spain’s article 155 offensive, and the insistent rumours of planned repression that could lead to much bloodshed if Catalonia’s government attempted to implement its declaration of independence, Puigdemont and his government decided to postpone these objectives, making peace and social cohesion the priority over everything else.
Today all the ministers of the legitimate government of Catalonia, as well as the officials of the speakers’s office at the Catalan parliament, have been summoned to court in Madrid to answer charges of sedition, rebellion and misuse of government funds.