This time, Catalonia’s government has promised that the referendum will be binding, even if it is declared illegal by Spain’s constitutional court and even if Catalan opponents of independence boycott it.
Brushing aside the fact that Spain’s constitutional court has suspended the referendum legislation that was hastily passed in the Catalan parliament last week – and that prosecutors are looking into whether he and others ministers should be charged with disobedience and abuse of power – Puigdemont said there was not “enough power” to thwart the wishes of democratic Catalans.
In response, Carles Puigdemont, the leader of Catalonia, told Catalan television that no politician or court in Madrid could stop the referendum.
Under the Catalan referendum law they are obliged to take part, but the law has been ruled illegal by Spain’s constitutional court.
BARCELONA, Spain — Separatist lawmakers declared Catalonia’s independence from Spain on Oct. 27, prompting the central government of Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy to take administrative control of the region, oust Catalan leaders and schedule elections on Dec. 21.
The EU has always maintained that the Catalan question is an internal Spanish matter, but has also said that Catalonia would have to reapply to join the union if it split from Spain.
In a letter to Puigdemont released later, Rajoy said the Catalan leader had until 10 a.m. local time Monday to confirm whether the Catalan parliament had declared independence.
A staunch and long-standing independence campaigner who has been the regional president of Catalonia since January 2016, Puigdemont was born to a family of bakers in the Catalan province of Girona in 1962.
Barcelona, Spain (CNN) Catalan leaders have insisted they will reject any attempt by Madrid to impose direct rule on their autonomous region, as a political crisis escalates over Catalonia's threats to declare independence from Spain.
After the referendum, the struggle over Catalonia intensified in an often confusing exchange between the Catalan leader, Carles Puigdemont, and Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of Spain.
The EU has said the Catalan referendum was illegal and that it will only deal with Spain’s central government in Madrid.
Barcelona, Spain (CNN) The deposed Catalan leader Carles Puigdemont has confirmed he will remain in Brussels ahead of a scheduled court appearance in Madrid over charges related to Catalan independence.
Timeline Eight key moments in the Catalan independence campaign Show Hide Spain’s constitutional court strikes down parts of a 2006 charter on Catalan autonomy that had originally increased the region’s fiscal and judicial powers and described it as a “nation”.
Spain’s constitutional court suspends the legislation the following day, but the Catalan government vows to press ahead with the vote.
The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%.
Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic.