Carles Puigdemont, the leader of Catalonia, assured the region’s voters that the independence referendum would take place, despite efforts by the Madrid government and Spanish courts to block it.
This time, Catalonia’s government has promised that the referendum will be binding, even if it is declared illegal by Spain’s constitutional court and even if Catalan opponents of independence boycott it.
In recent days, Mr. Rajoy’s government took legal action to ensure that Spain’s judiciary declares null and void the laws that separatist lawmakers have approved before the referendum.
In response, Carles Puigdemont, the leader of Catalonia, told Catalan television that no politician or court in Madrid could stop the referendum.
Madrid says the referendum is unconstitutional and so are the laws the Catalan parliament passed a week ago, which will in effect disconnect Catalonia from Spanish legislative and administrative control if the Yes vote prevails.
Even as Mr. Rajoy faces criticism from the Socialists, he is under pressure from hard-liners within his own Popular Party, who want him to activate emergency powers to take full administrative control over Catalonia, rather than use piecemeal steps to stop Catalans from financing and organizing their referendum.
BARCELONA, Spain — Separatist lawmakers declared Catalonia’s independence from Spain on Oct. 27, prompting the central government of Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy to take administrative control of the region, oust Catalan leaders and schedule elections on Dec. 21.
(CNN) Catalonia's separatist government is adamant it will go ahead with a referendum on October 1 to decide if the region should split from Spain, despite the country's highest court banning the vote.
We decide!” At the height of Spain’s economic crisis, more than a million people protest in Barcelona on Catalonia’s national day, demanding independence in what will become a peaceful, annual show of strength.
The pro-independence government of Artur Mas defies the Madrid government and Spain’s constitutional court by holding a symbolic vote on independence.
Spain’s constitutional court suspends the legislation the following day, but the Catalan government vows to press ahead with the vote.
The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%.
Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic.
Story highlights Catalan independence referendum has stoked fierce divisions across Spain
“Not just to pressure the Spanish government,” she said, “but to pressure the main Catalan parties to accomplish what they promised.”Barcelona (CNN) Catalonia is prepared to enter into a dialogue on independence from Spain "without preconditions," Catalan President Carles Puigdemont told CNN on Wednesday, as the Madrid government took the first steps to imposing direct rule on the region.
The Catalan president, Carles Puigdemont, has refused to clarify whether he declared Catalonia’s independence from Spain last week, but has repeated his calls for negotiations with the Madrid government to resolve the country’s ongoing political crisis.
Whatever the government decides on Saturday, the Catalan crisis is set to drag on: Mr. Rajoy would need approval from the Senate before intervening in Catalonia.
Barcelona, Spain (CNN) Catalan leaders have insisted they will reject any attempt by Madrid to impose direct rule on their autonomous region, as a political crisis escalates over Catalonia's threats to declare independence from Spain.
After the referendum, the struggle over Catalonia intensified in an often confusing exchange between the Catalan leader, Carles Puigdemont, and Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of Spain.
After weeks of equivocating, Mr. Puigdemont told the Spanish authorities that Catalan lawmakers might vote for independence.
Catalan President Carles Puigdemont said he had considered the option of dissolving the regional Parliament and calling new elections, in what appeared to be a last-ditch effort to stop Madrid from taking control of the region.
• Your report (Catalan vice-president says independence is the only remaining option, 26 October) repeats yet again the claim that “770,000 votes were lost after Spanish police stepped in to try to halt the vote” during the referendum on 1 October.
The EU has said the Catalan referendum was illegal and that it will only deal with Spain’s central government in Madrid.
Barcelona, Spain (CNN) The deposed Catalan leader Carles Puigdemont has confirmed he will remain in Brussels ahead of a scheduled court appearance in Madrid over charges related to Catalan independence.
On the morning of 26 October, the Catalan and Spanish government had reached an agreement whereby Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy would not proceed with suspending Catalonia’s devolved powers, provided President Carles Puigdemont would not make a formal declaration of independence and call regional elections immediately.