But Russia's Foreign Ministry criticized those elections Monday, saying Ukraine's parliament was acting rashly, and accused lawmakers of discriminating against ethnic Russians, most of whom live in the eastern part of the country -- near the border with Russia -- by excluding them from the reform process.
Vitaly Churkin, Russia's ambassador to the United Nations, rejected Ukraine's calls to stop Russian intervention.
Russia's take: Russia has said its parliament approved Putin's use of military force to protect Russian citizens in the Crimean peninsula.
The Crimean peninsula itself had been ruled by Russia for centuries until Nikita Khrushchev gave it away to Ukraine in 1954, a move that was deeply unpopular in Russia – some say Khrushchev was drunk at the time –and most ordinary Russians – as well, it seems, as a majority of Crimeans themselves – would like to see it returned to Russia.
Putin says Russia's actions fall within the scope of the 1997 Friendship Treaty between Ukraine and the Russian Federation.
However, his call for Russian troops in Crimea to return to their barracks and negotiations between Russia and Ukraine on a solution has so far yielded little progress.
Preliminary results in Sunday's referendum on whether Ukraine's Crimea region should join Russia or become an independent state show overwhelming support for Russia.
We don't want Crimea to be a part of Russia."Putin recognised Crimea as an independent state on Monday night, making it easier to incorporate into the Russian Federation than if it were still Ukrainian territory.
In the words of Vladimir Putin, "In people's hearts and minds, Crimea has always been an inseparable part of Russia." Indeed Russia said that in Sunday's referendum 97% of its participants, mostly ethnic Russians, insisted that to belong to the Great Russia versus Small Russia (Malorossiya, another name for Ukraine) had been their dream for 60 years since the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, my great-grandfather, transferred the peninsula's jurisdiction to Kiev.
But they will not enter the contested region of Crimea, a statement from the Russian Foreign Ministry said, because this "became part of Russia."
But they will not enter the contested region of Crimea, a statement from the Russian Foreign Ministry said, because this "became part of Russia."
Amid fears of further Russian military moves in Ukraine, G7 meets in The Hague without Russia for the first time since 1998
News of the proposed changes came during Obama's trip to Europe, where he's mobilizing support for isolating Russia over its military occupation and annexation of Crimea from Ukraine.
Russia annexed Crimea last week after a controversial referendum that Ukraine and the West say was illegal.
Supreme Allied Commander Europe Gen. Philip Breedlove said that Russia had a large force on Ukraine's eastern border and that he was worried it could threaten Moldova's separatist Transnistria region.
Moscow annexed Crimea after a snap referendum in the autonomous region last week that appeared to produce an overwhelming majority of votes in favor of leaving Ukraine to join Russia.
Ukraine's new leaders -- who took office after months of protests forced President Viktor Yanukovych, a Russian ally, from office -- as well as the United States and other Western powers say Crimea is still a part of Ukraine.
Crimea had belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine.
Russian CyberCommand is another group of hackers, some of whom are Russian, who oppose Putin's annexation of Crimea and have been relentless in their attacks against Russian businesses and agencies such as Rosoboronexport -- Russia's sole agency authorized to sell defense and dual-use products and technologies to foreign entities -- and SearchInform.ru -- a Russian IT security company that provides services to Gazprom, Skolkovo, and other important organizations.
As of March 18, Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said that Ukraine would not be seeking NATO membership, a move designed to placate Russia as well as Ukraine's large Russian-speaking population.
Those additional sanctions could be prompted if Russia further escalates its incursion into Ukraine, which the official defined as sending troops beyond Crimea into the southern or eastern parts of the country.
While the official said further penetration of Ukraine by Russian troops remains the most immediate source of concern for the United States, other potential land grabs also worry the United States and its allies.