"Russia has a historic relationship with Ukraine, including cultural and economic ties, and a military facility in Crimea, but any violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity would be deeply destabilizing, which is not in the interest of Ukraine, Russia, or Europe.
British Prime Minister David Cameron and U.S. President Barack Obama are of like mind about Russia's military exercises in relation to Ukraine: "There must be significant costs to Russia if it does not change course on Ukraine," Hague said.
The Crimean peninsula itself had been ruled by Russia for centuries until Nikita Khrushchev gave it away to Ukraine in 1954, a move that was deeply unpopular in Russia – some say Khrushchev was drunk at the time –and most ordinary Russians – as well, it seems, as a majority of Crimeans themselves – would like to see it returned to Russia.
Putin says Russia's actions fall within the scope of the 1997 Friendship Treaty between Ukraine and the Russian Federation.
However, his call for Russian troops in Crimea to return to their barracks and negotiations between Russia and Ukraine on a solution has so far yielded little progress.
Preliminary results in Sunday's referendum on whether Ukraine's Crimea region should join Russia or become an independent state show overwhelming support for Russia.
The US and European Union have imposed sanctions on Russian and Ukrainian officials in response to Russian actions in Ukraine, which culminated on Sunday in Crimea's vote to join Russia.
In the words of Vladimir Putin, "In people's hearts and minds, Crimea has always been an inseparable part of Russia." Indeed Russia said that in Sunday's referendum 97% of its participants, mostly ethnic Russians, insisted that to belong to the Great Russia versus Small Russia (Malorossiya, another name for Ukraine) had been their dream for 60 years since the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, my great-grandfather, transferred the peninsula's jurisdiction to Kiev.
Crimea had belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine.
Amid fears of further Russian military moves in Ukraine, G7 meets in The Hague without Russia for the first time since 1998
News of the proposed changes came during Obama's trip to Europe, where he's mobilizing support for isolating Russia over its military occupation and annexation of Crimea from Ukraine.
Russia annexed Crimea last week after a controversial referendum that Ukraine and the West say was illegal.
Crimea had belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine.
As of March 18, Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said that Ukraine would not be seeking NATO membership, a move designed to placate Russia as well as Ukraine's large Russian-speaking population.