In an interview Tuesday with PBS, acting Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said Ukraine is struggling to maintain a fighting capability after it was "deliberately dismantled" under Yanukovych.
He said his government ceded Crimea without a shot to demonstrate to the world that Russia was the aggressor, he said.
Ukraine wants to be independent from Putin," she said in Russian.
The director of Donetsk's steel plant said he worried what would happen if Russia shut its border to Ukrainian goods.
"The EU doesn't want Ukraine.
Others said that two decades after Ukraine became independent, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, living standards had scarcely improved, with many surviving on pathetically low wages.
"We've put up with these conditions for 23 years," he said, adding: "Russia is like a magnet.
Moscow, for example, could ban Ukrainian goods, arguing that they don't meet Russian standards, Todorov said.
He said Ukraine's oligarchs were primarily concerned with hanging on to their assets in uncertain times.
Mazur said the problems with Ukraine's economy were profound.
"Ukraine isn't the modern world," he replied gloomily.But voices just as adamant urged caution, and few lawmakers said they were eager for a military confrontation.
Mr. Corker said more punitive actions should be threatened only if Russia moved farther into Ukraine or threatened neighbors like Moldova.
Last week, Farage said the European Union had "blood on its hands" for encouraging rebellion in Ukraine, Syria and Libya.
While stressing he did not approve of Putin's annexation of Crimea, he said EU leaders had been "weak and vain", adding: "If you poke the Russian bear with a stick he will respond."
In what American officials interpreted as an encouraging sign on Monday that Russia would not invade other regions of Ukraine, the German government released a statement saying Mr. Putin told Chancellor Angela Merkel in a telephone call that he had ordered a partial withdrawal of Russian troops massed on Ukraine’s eastern border, a source of great tension with Western governments in recent weeks.
It said only that the leaders “discussed various aspects of the situation in Ukraine, including the possibility for international involvement in restoring stability” and that the pair had also talked about constitutional overhaul in Ukraine and another troubled region of Eastern Europe, the separatist Transnistria region of Moldova.For his part, Putin warned that sanctions against Russia over Ukraine would “in no way” resolve the crisis.