"If we join the European Union our mines and factories will shut down," he said.
The United States and Europe are united in their support for Ukraine, including the need for economic assistance, and in their efforts to isolate Russia for its intervention in Crimea, Obama said, speaking at an European Union-U.S. summit in Brussels, Belgium.
Instead of the EU, Ukraine would be better off joining Vladimir Putin's rival Eurasian Union, he suggested.
Ukraine wants to be independent from Putin," she said in Russian.
In recent febrile weeks some pro-Russian campaigners have been calling for Donetsk to follow Crimea and join Russia.
The director of Donetsk's steel plant said he worried what would happen if Russia shut its border to Ukrainian goods.
"The EU doesn't want Ukraine.
Only friendly relations with "brotherly" Russia could bring prosperity, he argued, saying that Russia, Belarus and Ukraine shared history and orthodox religion.
Others said that two decades after Ukraine became independent, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, living standards had scarcely improved, with many surviving on pathetically low wages.
"We've put up with these conditions for 23 years," he said, adding: "Russia is like a magnet.
But it's certainly true a part of Ukraine's economy is closely connected with Russia." The Kremlin, he added, had numerous economic levers it could pull to sabotage the economy and undermine Kiev.
Moscow, for example, could ban Ukrainian goods, arguing that they don't meet Russian standards, Todorov said.
He said Ukraine's oligarchs were primarily concerned with hanging on to their assets in uncertain times.
Down the road from Donetsk is the port of Mariupol, home to two of Ukraine's biggest steel factories.
Mazur said the problems with Ukraine's economy were profound.
Shakhnazarov, 61, the head of Mosfilm, Russia’s major movie studio, said he signed first in memory of his father, who fought in the Red Army to liberate Crimea from the Nazis.
More important, Mr. Shakhnazarov signed because, he said, Ukraine lacks a legitimate government, and the people in Crimea “have the right to choose their fate themselves.”
“President Obama underscored to President Putin that the United States continues to support a diplomatic path in close consultation with the government of Ukraine and in support of the Ukrainian people with the aim of de-escalation of the crisis,” the White House said in a statement.
“President Obama made clear that this remains possible only if Russia pulls back its troops and does not take any steps to further violate Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.”
Primarily, he said, Russia was seeking a federal solution for Ukraine as part of "deep constitutional reform".
Russia does not recognise the current leadership in Kiev, which it says mounted a "fascist coup" in February to oust Ukraine's elected president, Viktor Yanukovych.
Last week, Farage said the European Union had "blood on its hands" for encouraging rebellion in Ukraine, Syria and Libya.
While stressing he did not approve of Putin's annexation of Crimea, he said EU leaders had been "weak and vain", adding: "If you poke the Russian bear with a stick he will respond."
In what American officials interpreted as an encouraging sign on Monday that Russia would not invade other regions of Ukraine, the German government released a statement saying Mr. Putin told Chancellor Angela Merkel in a telephone call that he had ordered a partial withdrawal of Russian troops massed on Ukraine’s eastern border, a source of great tension with Western governments in recent weeks.
Moscow cancelled the October trip hours after the then president François Hollande said Russia could face war crimes charges over its bombardment of Aleppo, Syria’s second largest city.“World powers prepare for war in Europe,” one Russian politics site declared in its headline.
However, Snowden has never professed any great enthusiasm for Russian governance, and most of the available evidence suggests he did not end up in Russia by design, but because of a failed scheme, hatched by WikiLeaks to fly him from Hong Kong to Latin America.
Kadri Liik, an expert on Russian-European relations, said: “Some fake news probably may have influenced the Brexit vote, but these fake news were manufactured by the British tabloids and the leave campaign.
“This libertarian hatred of political correctness, that everyone has to follow this social democratic view on gender, welfare, progressive politics and immigration, and libertarians can’t stand that, as degrading the idea of individual liberty,” Bartlett said.
“One of the reasons is that they believe that at least Putin is standing up for traditional institutions, and he’s trying to do it in a form of nationalism – and I think that people, particularly in certain countries, want to see sovereignty for their country, they want to see nationalism for their country,” Bannon said, according to a transcript of the discussion published by BuzzFeed.
“The radical libertarians and the autocrats are allied by virtue of sharing an enemy which is the mainstream, soft, establishment, liberal politics,” said Jamie Bartlett, the director of the centre for the analysis of social media at the Demos thinktank.
“They have been able to forge a very convenient marriage with other enemies of liberal democracy,” said Bartlett, “who are in every other sense imaginable completely at odds with each other, but they do share that common hatred of establishment, western, soft, democratic politics as they see it.”