"If we join the European Union our mines and factories will shut down," he said.
The United States and Europe are united in their support for Ukraine, including the need for economic assistance, and in their efforts to isolate Russia for its intervention in Crimea, Obama said, speaking at an European Union-U.S. summit in Brussels, Belgium.
Instead of the EU, Ukraine would be better off joining Vladimir Putin's rival Eurasian Union, he suggested.
Ukraine wants to be independent from Putin," she said in Russian.
In recent febrile weeks some pro-Russian campaigners have been calling for Donetsk to follow Crimea and join Russia.
The director of Donetsk's steel plant said he worried what would happen if Russia shut its border to Ukrainian goods.
"The EU doesn't want Ukraine.
Others said that two decades after Ukraine became independent, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, living standards had scarcely improved, with many surviving on pathetically low wages.
"We've put up with these conditions for 23 years," he said, adding: "Russia is like a magnet.
But it's certainly true a part of Ukraine's economy is closely connected with Russia." The Kremlin, he added, had numerous economic levers it could pull to sabotage the economy and undermine Kiev.
Moscow, for example, could ban Ukrainian goods, arguing that they don't meet Russian standards, Todorov said.
He said Ukraine's oligarchs were primarily concerned with hanging on to their assets in uncertain times.
Mazur said the problems with Ukraine's economy were profound.
He said Putin's desire "to protect the Russian-speaking people of Crimea, his assets, and the Russian Black Sea military base in Sevastopol … [was] very reasonable".
The Russian Foreign Ministry said the U.N. vote -- which followed Moscow's annexation of Ukraine's Crimea region last week on the basis of the hastily called referendum -- would do nothing to help resolve the situation.
Primarily, he said, Russia was seeking a federal solution for Ukraine as part of "deep constitutional reform".
Last week, Farage said the European Union had "blood on its hands" for encouraging rebellion in Ukraine, Syria and Libya.
While stressing he did not approve of Putin's annexation of Crimea, he said EU leaders had been "weak and vain", adding: "If you poke the Russian bear with a stick he will respond."
MOSCOW — Moving quickly to envelop Crimea in the Russian bureaucracy and economy, the Kremlin said Monday that it had nearly doubled pensions paid to retirees on the peninsula, raising them to the average levels paid in Russia.
The Macron camp alleged during the election campaign that Russia had been engaged in disinformation efforts, and at one point refused accreditation to the Russian state-funded Sputnik and Russia Today news outlets, which it said were spreading Russian propaganda and fake news.
Kadri Liik, an expert on Russian-European relations, said: “Some fake news probably may have influenced the Brexit vote, but these fake news were manufactured by the British tabloids and the leave campaign.
“One of the reasons is that they believe that at least Putin is standing up for traditional institutions, and he’s trying to do it in a form of nationalism – and I think that people, particularly in certain countries, want to see sovereignty for their country, they want to see nationalism for their country,” Bannon said, according to a transcript of the discussion published by BuzzFeed.
“They have been able to forge a very convenient marriage with other enemies of liberal democracy,” said Bartlett, “who are in every other sense imaginable completely at odds with each other, but they do share that common hatred of establishment, western, soft, democratic politics as they see it.”