British expats could forfeit their rights to live in Spain if they vote to leave the EU, the Spanish prime minister has warned, saying forgoing free movement rights would be “negative for everyone”.
After the Council meeting ended, diplomats said that they were continuing to negotiate and that no vote had been scheduled.
Free movement and its effects on migration to the UK is one of the key issues for voters, according to new polling conducted by Vote Leave, which found almost half of those surveyed said levels of migration from the other 27 EU countries had been bad for the UK, against 26% who thought it had benefited Britain.How do you register to vote?
If you want to vote in the EU referendum and you are not on the register, or have moved since you last voted, you have until midnight on Tuesday 7 June to submit an application.
How do you vote?
At the same time another more fundamental problem might arise in the wake of a UK referendum leave vote. What if Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales vote remain, their MPs propose an amendment to parliament’s EEA motion in support of the UK’s continued membership of the EU, and pro-EU English MPs vote with them to pass their amendment? The UK would be plunged into a full-blown constitutional crisis concerning the very sovereignty of parliament.
Not this time. The paper has not so far unambiguously editorialized in favor of leaving, but the tone was set in February, when Mr. Cameron renegotiated Britain’s ties to the European Union, before recommending a vote to remain.
Vote Leave, the official out campaign, responded to leaks of the plans by accusing the chancellor of breaking seven key Tory pledges on which they were elected last year, and set out a competing vision of a post-Brexit world in which Britain would claw back money from the EU. The campaign group said that parliament would react to an out vote by bringing in legislation to cut VAT on fuel, boost NHS funding and bring in a points-based system for immigration.
“We depend on European workers,” he said. “It would be insane for Britain to leave.”
Responding to the latest IMF remarks, Matthew Elliott, chief executive of Vote Leave said: “The IMF has chosen to ignore the positive benefits of leaving the EU and instead focused only on the supposed negatives. If we vote leave, we can create 300,000 jobs by doing trade deals with fast growing economies across the globe. We can stop sending the £350m we pay Brussels every week. That is why it is safer to vote leave.”
Too many believe that a vote to leave the EU will have no effect on their personal financial position. This is wishful thinking. It would have at least one very clear and immediate effect that will touch every household: the value of the pound would decline precipitously. It would also have an immediate and dramatic impact on financial markets, investment, prices and jobs.
As opinion polls on the referendum result fluctuate, I want to offer a clear set of facts, based on my six decades of experience in financial markets, to help voters understand the very real consequences of a vote to leave the EU.
I want people to know what the consequences of leaving the EU would be before they cast their votes, rather than after. A vote to leave could see the week end with a Black Friday, and serious consequences for ordinary people.Jeremy Cook, chief economist at currency broker WorldFirst, watched sterling plummet throughout the early hours of Friday. He said: “Sterling is in freefall at the moment. It looks like its goose is cooked.” At one point, Cook shouted across the trading room: “It’s fallen into the 30s,”, as the likelihood of a leave vote increased and the pound fell below $1.40.
As more results came in, Cook said the pound was suffering swings in volatility that exceeded the financial crisis.
The DPP has said it wants a Danish referendum on less binding conditions of EU membership. But Denmark’s centre-right prime minister, who relies on the support of the DPP to prop up his minority administration, said there would be no such plebiscite.
Steven Murchie, 29, who works in a whisky shop, said he thought differently. He voted for Britain to leave and said he was not concerned with the economic downturn that Britain potentially faces.
Anti-immigrant leaflets saying "Leave the EU - no more Polish vermin" were put on cars near a school, local police said, the day after the country voted to leave the European Union
Haran characterised the events of the tumultuous past three months as a "national liberation and anti-corruption movement". It was pro-decency, and opposed to a president who behaved "like a puppet of Russia", he said.
“In France, this could serve the National Front,” she said. “It’s an adaptation to the agenda of the National Front.”
Looming much larger than Westminster’s personality politics should be how to negotiate Brexit without too much mutual damage or contagion throughout the EU’s single currency eurozone, where populist parties are now thriving thanks to globalization and economic mismanagement. Led by France’s National Front, several have called for their own Brexit-style ballots. Nato cohesion and other collateral issues will have to wait.
