British expats could forfeit their rights to live in Spain if they vote to leave the EU, the Spanish prime minister has warned, saying forgoing free movement rights would be “negative for everyone”.
After the Council meeting ended, diplomats said that they were continuing to negotiate and that no vote had been scheduled.
More than 400,000 British citizens live and work in Spain, while 100,000 Spanish citizens live in the UK, Mariano Rajoy said.
UK citizens, he said, would forfeit crucial rights to live and work across the continent. “Leaving the European Union would mean that British citizens would lose their right to move freely, work and do business within the largest economic area, the largest market in the world,” he said.
British expats in Spain, many of them retired, have expressed concern about access to healthcare after a potential leave vote. UK citizens are entitled to healthcare via the European health insurance card or free health insurance from the Spanish government under EU law, but Spain would not be obliged to continue to offer free healthcare to non-EU citizens.
Leave campaigners have argued that new rights for British citizens to live and work in other EU countries could be negotiated after Brexit.
Free movement and its effects on migration to the UK is one of the key issues for voters, according to new polling conducted by Vote Leave, which found almost half of those surveyed said levels of migration from the other 27 EU countries had been bad for the UK, against 26% who thought it had benefited Britain.A British citizen living overseas who has been registered to vote in the UK in the past 15 years.
Do you need to re-register to vote in the referendum?
Your report on the consequences of a leave vote (Guerilla campaign mooted, 7 June) quotes a pro-European MP saying “We would have to respect the mandate of the referendum”. But it is quite unclear what that mandate might be, as the referendum question does not specify the range of alternatives to full EU membership should the UK vote to leave. Until parliament has determined whether, for example, it wishes the UK to remain in the European Economic Area, it would be inappropriate for David Cameron to formally notify the EU of the UK’s intention to withdraw from the EU. A leave vote would therefore need to be followed by an emergency debate in parliament from Monday 27 June onwards about the UK’s withdrawal options, where the most likely outcome, as you indicate, would be overwhelming support for the UK to remain in EEA, which would of course outrage hard-line Brexiters in the Conservative party.
Not this time. The paper has not so far unambiguously editorialized in favor of leaving, but the tone was set in February, when Mr. Cameron renegotiated Britain’s ties to the European Union, before recommending a vote to remain.
Vote Leave, the official out campaign, responded to leaks of the plans by accusing the chancellor of breaking seven key Tory pledges on which they were elected last year, and set out a competing vision of a post-Brexit world in which Britain would claw back money from the EU. The campaign group said that parliament would react to an out vote by bringing in legislation to cut VAT on fuel, boost NHS funding and bring in a points-based system for immigration.
“We depend on European workers,” he said. “It would be insane for Britain to leave.”
The IMF said last month that Brexit could spark a stock market crash and a steep fall in house prices. In Saturday’s report to conclude its annual assessment of Britain’s economy, it added that a leave vote would tie the UK up in trade negotiations that could drag on for years.
'Brexit would trigger sterling fall worse than Black Wednesday' Read more
According to the British Election Study, the overall vote is pretty evenly split between Brexit and remain, but two thirds of Britain’s minority ethnic voters favour staying in the EU. At first glance that might not appear too surprising, but in a debate that has focused heavily on immigration, what is it that has made a third of minority voters – many of them the descendants of immigrants themselves – lean towards leaving?
Results from across the country suggesting the Brexit camp was on the brink of declaring a referendum victory led to sterling reversing initial gains to leave the pound down more than 10% at $1.33, compared with $1.50 just after polling stations closed. That was the lowest since 1985. The pound was down more than 7% against the euro.
As more results came in, Cook said the pound was suffering swings in volatility that exceeded the financial crisis.
Hilary Benn, the shadow foreign secretary, had already said Cameron would have to resign if the UK voted for Brexit. “If there were to be a vote to leave, then as far as the prime minister is concerned I don’t see how he is going to remain in his job for very long at all,” he said.
Steven Murchie, 29, who works in a whisky shop, said he thought differently. He voted for Britain to leave and said he was not concerned with the economic downturn that Britain potentially faces.
"Given how many Labour voters voted to leave, this may just be a wound that the Labour Party will not want to rub," said Curtice.
Haran characterised the events of the tumultuous past three months as a "national liberation and anti-corruption movement". It was pro-decency, and opposed to a president who behaved "like a puppet of Russia", he said.
But playing down immigration, Mr. Goodwin said, could create more political trouble. “I worry for senior euroskeptic leaders, because there is a misunderstanding of the vote, and that will feed voter dissatisfaction,” he said, driving many of the voters who chose a British exit to turn away from both mainstream parties and move to the populist right.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Theresa May announced her bid to succeed David Cameron as prime minister, saying negotiations to leave the EU should not begin before the end of the year. Photograph: Frantzesco Kangaris/AFP/Getty Images
Scottish voters are reconsidering their opposition to independence after the Brexit vote, the SNP’s business convener, Derek Mackay, has said, despite a poll that found a majority still favoured being part of the UK outside the EU.
At 62%, almost two-thirds of Scots who took part in last month’s referendum on EU membership voted to remain, prompting the SNP’s leader and Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, to say that the leave result made another vote on Scottish independence highly likely.
The percentage who said they would not vote or did not know increased from 12% to 14% after the Brexit vote, the poll found.
“The prime minister has been very clear that we are going to make a success of Brexit, and the focus now needs to be on collaborative working with the Scottish government as ‘Team UK’ to ensure the best possible deal for Scotland and the rest of the UK.”
The arithmetic told us that motivating and mobilising pro-EU voters would be nowhere near enough; we would also need the votes of people whose underlying attitudes meant they would find the leave campaign’s arguments compelling and would be hard to persuade.
Within the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign, the referendum often felt like a battle between a simple lie and a complex truth. The leave campaign seemed to have all the best tunes. “Take back control” was a strong, clear message requiring no explanation. It was demonstrably not true that leaving the EU would give the UK £350m a week to spend on other things like the NHS, but endless repetition of that single number meant people heard it and it struck a chord.
YouGov said the results represented a move towards the independence option of just 1% since it last asked the question in May.
Fifty-five percent of Scottish voters opted to remain in the UK less than two years ago, with 45% supporting independence, but the SNP has since received a huge boost in support, winning all but three Scottish seats in Westminster at last year’s general election.
The third chunk – 34% of the population – was conflicted. These people were the in-play voters: the primary target for both campaigns in the EU referendum. They were very clear that they didn’t like the EU, and why: uncontrolled immigration, the huge direct cost of membership, too much meddling in our laws and lives. They were torn between the appealing idea of insulating the UK from the pressures of an open world, and fear of the idea of a Britain outside the EU, isolated and alone. They were defined by the attitude that “my heart wants to leave the EU, but my head says it may be too risky”.
One of the few straightforward ways to try to get across the risks of leaving the EU was to point out the overwhelming weight of opinion among economists, businesses, unions – the reviled “experts”. Research established that “independent experts” were top of the list of people whose opinions the swing voters wanted to hear. It turned out that what they really meant was “independent experts who agree with me”. A poll during the campaign found that while remain voters trusted a wide range of experts and professionals, leave voters didn’t trust anyone.
The YouGov poll found there had been no real shift in opinion towards Scottish independence, with 53% saying they would vote for Scotland to remain in the UK and 47% that they would vote to separate.
“While Scottish independence has been mooted in the wake of the vote to leave the EU, a new referendum is not currently on the table.
The UK minister Andrew Dunlop said another “divisive constitutional debate” was not what the country wanted.
YouGov’s Matthew Smith said: “One month after the UK’s shock decision to leave the EU, the latest YouGov research in Scotland shows no real shift towards independence.”
“The arguments for Scotland remaining a part of the UK are just as compelling as they were in 2014, in or out of the EU,” he said.
Despite YouGov’s findings, the SNP’s business convener Derek Mackay says many voters in Scotland are reconsidering
“This poll is the latest to demonstrate that many no voters are reconsidering their opposition to independence now that Scotland faces being dragged out of the EU against our will,” Mackay said.
The latest findings also emerged just hours after the SNP’s leader in Westminster, Angus Robertson, said Scotland was “truly on the brink of independence”.
Forty-six percent of respondents said they would rather live in a Scotland that was still part of the UK after it had left the EU, compared with 37% who would rather live in an independent Scotland within the EU. The numbers become 55% to 45% once “don’t knows” are removed.
