But like Russia, Iranian leaders are increasingly embedded with Mr. Assad, seeing him as a vital strategic ally after more than six years of defending his government in Syria’s war. They also do not want to see a greater military entanglement with the United States.
So in their public reaction to the retaliatory American missile strike early Friday in Syria, Iranian leaders have done little except condemn it and join Russia in calling for an international investigation. And like Russia, they suggested that terrorist groups — as they call Mr. Assad’s opponents — had used chemical weapons on their own people to provoke a strike by the United States.
On Monday, Russia’s Foreign Ministry said in a statement that the American missile strike was an aggressive act against a sovereign state and violated international law. The statement was issued after a telephone call between Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov and his Iranian counterpart, Mohammad Javad Zarif.
But Iranian political analysts knowledgeable about government thinking are also interpreting the missile strike as only a symbolic show of force by President Trump, who often portrayed President Barack Obama as indecisive on Syria.
“Trump wants to flex his muscles and show that he is different from Obama,” said Farshad Ghorbanpour, an analyst close to President Hassan Rouhani of Iran. “But we don’t think he will continue bombing in Syria. This is just a knee-jerk reaction.”
On his Twitter account, Mr. Zarif compared the strike to the fallacious case made by the George W. Bush administration in 2003 that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction and therefore needed to be attacked.
On Sunday, Mr. Zarif posted an image of a Foreign Ministry document concluding that “extremist organizations, particularly al-Nusra and ISIS,” are the only ones possessing chemical weapons.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Not only have those groups used such weapons in Syria and Iraq before, the document said, but “they had a clear — and desperate — motive to use them, given that the tragedy in Khan Sheikhoun took place only days after the Trump administration publicly abandoned the U.S. policy of regime change in Syria.”
Using satellite tracking and other surveillance tools, the Pentagon said it had concluded that Syrian warplanes dumped outlawed chemical bombs most likely containing sarin nerve agent on Khan Sheikhoun. Acting on Mr. Trump’s orders, American warships launched Tomahawk missiles that struck the Al Shayrat airfield, where the planes were based — the first direct attack on Mr. Assad’s forces by the United States since the war began.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Russia responded by suspending an agreement with the United States aimed at preventing accidental encounters between the two in aircraft missions over Syria. The missile strike also presented Iran with an opportunity to give Russia more latitude in using Iranian bases. The Iranians conspicuously said nothing about it.
Russia flies some planes out of airports in government-controlled Syria, but its long-range bombers operate out of Russia, which has limited its abilities to strike Mr. Assad’s opponents.
“Whenever we deem it necessary, we will give them the use of our air bases,” said Hamidreza Taraghi, a hard-line political analyst who has close relations with Iran’s highest leaders. Iran has occasionally been granting Russia access to the Shahid Nojeh air base in Hamadan, but not unlimited use.
When Russia announced last year that it had been using the Iranian base, becoming the first foreign power since the 1979 Islamic Revolution to have a military presence in Iran, Iranian hard-liners objected on what was clearly a sensitive issue for them.
Iranians say Russia has often betrayed their country in their long history together. Use of the base is now decided case by case.
It remains unclear at best whether that will change, bringing the countries closer together and dragging them even deeper into the Syrian war.
“We are growing closer and closer to the Russians in our cooperation in fighting terrorism,” Mr. Taraghi said. “That’s all I can say.”