Who did the work to find and eliminate the chemical weapons?
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons sent a team to Syria. Established in 1997 and based in The Hague, the organization is charged with enforcing the Chemical Weapons Convention that bans such arms. As of last fall, it reported that 67,098 metric tons of chemical agents, or 90 percent of the world’s declared stockpile of 72,304 metric tons, had been “verifiably destroyed.”
How did the process work?
First, the Syrian government issued a declaration ostensibly listing its stock of chemical weapons, though some American officials and independent experts were skeptical about whether it was complete. Teams from the O.P.C.W. visited 21 weapon-making sites to confirm that Syria had dismantled or destroyed its equipment; two other sites were considered too dangerous to visit because of fighting, but inspectors believed that they, too, had been taken apart.
Video
The weapons, and chemicals used to make them, were diluted to make the material less dangerous to transport and then loaded onto a Danish ship in the Syrian port of Latakia. That ship, under the protection of Russia and China, delivered the chemicals to an American Navy vessel, the Cape Ray, where the chemicals were neutralized. More shipments followed, and in January 2016, the O.P.C.W. announced that the last of the Syrian stocks had been destroyed.
So did that eliminate the threat?
Not entirely, though by all accounts, it removed lethal weapons that could have caused slaughter and suffering on a huge scale. Even as the O.P.C.W. completed its mission, new reports emerged of scattered attacks in Syria using chlorine and other suspected chemicals.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Obama administration officials say that they always believed Mr. Assad might be withholding at least small chemical supplies, and that in public statements, Mr. Kerry and others tried to refer to the elimination of Syria’s “declared” stocks, a nuance often lost in news reports. American officials repeatedly returned to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons with intelligence reports on remaining chemical stocks, pressing for further action.
Despite the failure to completely eliminate Syria’s chemical weapons, Obama administration officials and outside experts considered the program fundamentally a success. “We strongly believed it was better to get 1,300 tons of chemical weapons out of the hands of the Syrian regime, or let them fall into the hands of ISIL,” Jonathan Finer, who was Mr. Kerry’s chief of staff and is now a fellow at the Institute of Politics at Harvard, said, using another name for the Islamic State.
Where did the nerve agent used in the attack this week come from?
Two possibilities are receiving attention: that the agent, sarin, was in stocks Mr. Assad hid from inspectors, or that weapons specialists in the Syrian government manufactured a new supply. While it is not simple to make sarin, it is possible in a small lab that could be easily hidden in a basement, out of sight of inspectors and foreign spy satellites.
Why did the Syrian government decide to carry out this massacre?
One underlying factor in Syria’s latest attack may have been perceived signals of apathy from Russia and the United States. Russia proposed and participated in the destruction of weapons stocks, but since 2015, Russian officials, who have long supported Mr. Assad, have repeatedly denied or obfuscated evidence of new chemical attacks by the government.
And President Trump, who publicly opposed American military action after the 2013 attack, had strongly suggested that his main concern in Syria was defeating the Islamic State, not restraining the government.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Some 500,000 people have died in the Syrian civil war. Why do the hundreds killed by chemical weapons get so much attention?
Some peace activists have asked that very question, suggesting that the disproportionate news coverage is illogical. But Daryl G. Kimball, executive director of the Arms Control Association, an advocacy group in Washington, said that since the horrors of World War I, an international consensus has put chemical weapons in a special category. “They’re indiscriminate weapons, and they kill in a particularly horrific way,” Mr. Kimball said. “They’re taboo.”