Until December 2011, Durov enjoyed the favor of the Kremlin’s internal powerbroker, Vladislav Surkov. But after the parliamentary elections that month, the Moscow middle class declared the victory of Mr. Putin’s party to be a fraud, and 150,000 people came out to protest on Bolotnaya Square. Mr. Durov’s patron resigned, and VKontakte began receiving persistent calls from the prosecutor’s office and Russia’s security service, the F.S.B., requesting that it shut down an anti-Putin online group called “United Russia — The Party of Crooks and Thieves” and other groups associated with the opposition. Mr. Durov replied to a summons to the prosecutor’s office with a picture of a husky dressed in a hoodie and sticking out its tongue.
He came to be seen by the Kremlin as an uncontrollable libertarian, prone to eccentric displays like tossing 5000-ruble notes out of the window and showing the finger to representatives of shareholders trying to bring VKontakte under the control of Mail.ru Group.
The investment fund United Capital Partners exploited a conflict between Mr. Durov and his partners to acquire a significant stake in the company. The deal was orchestrated by Igor Sechin, Mr. Putin’s right-hand man. Then the fund requested reams of financial documents, insisting VKontakte was earning too little profit. The state prosecutor launched a criminal investigation of Mr. Durov, claiming he had run over a policeman in his Mercedes. He left Russia.
The investigation was closed a few months later, as suddenly as it was launched, and Mr. Durov returned to St. Petersburg and decided to sell his shares, not so much because of intimidation but because he was inspired to use the profits to develop a new product: a mobile messenger called Telegram.
According to several sources, Mr. Durov received an unequivocal hint from his shareholders that the time had come to close the deal and retire before the Olympics began. Mr. Durov’s shares in VKontakte were valued at $250 million to $300 million. The VKontakte founder decided it would be simpler to leave the social network and take up the challenge of starting Telegram, which has been gaining up to 400,000 new users a day.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Meanwhile, the Kremlin’s control over traditional media and social media is tightening. In January, Parliament passed a law allowing it to quickly block any undesirable website. And there’s no reason to assume that the stranglehold over independent media will be relaxed now that the Olympics are over.
Media owners have also begun to restrict the activities of editors. And the Kremlin has intensified its propaganda. The state news agency RIA Novosti and the Russia Today channel merged into a single structure. The former top manager has started publishing opinion articles on sensitive topics that diverge from the official government position. Now the agency is led by Dmitry Kiselev, an odious talk show host infamous for his suggestion that “gays’ hearts should be incinerated in ovens.”
The purchase of VKontakte was a complex and delicate operation for the Kremlin. Handing media over to loyal businessmen is not a new method of controlling journalists. The Russian state tried it in 2002, when creditors leaned on the owner of NTV, Vladimir Gusinsky, forcing him to sell the company. (NTV is now owned by Gazprom-Media.)
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
But VKontakte’s pro-Kremlin shareholders were too unfamiliar with information technology, and feared that if they pushed too hard Mr. Durov could have caused a blackout. Understanding this, Mr. Durov sought to maintain the image of a crazy man unafraid of litigation or losses. This is why the operation to buy out his shares was conducted with such meticulous precision.
The brightest maverick in Russia’s business world gave the millennial generation a powerful instrument of organization and self-expression. But in the end Mr. Durov and his company were unable to withstand the pressure of pro-Putin businessmen made rich by the same oil-and-gas wealth that has improved Russians’ quality of life while paralyzing their political will.
But there is generational tension when it comes to media censorship. Most of Mr. Putin’s supporters are Russians over 35; the millennial generation, which grew up on VKontakte, is at best skeptical about Mr. Putin’s flights with wild cranes or his extraction of amphoras from the Black Sea floor. Their real hero was Mr. Durov — a start-up entrepreneur who built a company now worth $3.5 billion by buying a server with the money he saved as a freelancer — and that hero is now leaving Russia.
Mr. Durov tried to comply with government requests in accordance with the law. Now the state has more direct access, whenever it wants, to the personal information, correspondence, locations and movements of tens of millions of Russians — not to mention data on their emotions and intentions.
The Kremlin can now rest easy; any restive opposition activity on the Internet can easily be brought under control.
Nickolay Kononov is editor in chief of Hopes & Fears, a digital magazine about business in Russia.