As a bulwark against expanding European influence, former Soviet states bordering Russia are kept in line largely by economic pressure. But it will also use force
Vladimir Putin's post-facto request on Saturday to the upper house of the Russian parliament to approve the use of military forces in Ukraine should not really have come as much of a surprise.
There were few who had any doubts that the uniformed men who seized airports on the Crimean peninsula on Friday were Russian forces. The big question, however, is: what does Putin actually want?
Attempting to explain the idea of modern Russia in his 2002 book The End of Eurasia, the political scientist Dmitri Trenin took inspiration from the poetry of Yevgeny Yevtushenko. "A border in Russia," in Yevtushenko's words, "is more than a border."
In terms of Moscow's foreign policy in what it calls its "near abroad" – the states of the former Soviet Union – that means a complex set of assumptions that informs not only the Russian intervention in Crimea on Friday, but how it exerts power and influence on its neighbours. In recent Russian history that has been encapsulated in overlapping notions, where Moscow's sphere of influence in the post-Soviet region intersects with areas with Russian-speaking populations and a wider Slavic culture.
In 1993, long before Putin's rise to power, foreign minister Andrei Kozyrev said that Russia reserved the right to intervene in the former Soviet republics. Since then there have been adventures in Moldova, Georgia in 2008 – and now, it appears, Ukraine. Russia has not only exerted its influence through its military might but through political and economic power as well.
As James Sherr argued in his study of Russia's influence in its near abroad, Hard Diplomacy and Soft Power, those interventions sometimes have been as much about punishing or neutralising a perceived opponent as the pursuit of a particular realisable goal.
The result, he argues, is a policy of "soft coercion" with a broad toolkit of methods designed to keep Moscow's neighbours in check. These include covert actions, economic and other pressures such as the lever of cheap energy supplies – and finally the threat of limited military intervention.
John Lough, a former Nato official and expert on Russia at the Chatham House thinktank, argues that "central to Russia's view of the region is that it sees Ukraine's independence [in 1991] as a historic accident. It has never accepted it as permanent. Russian officials talk about it as a state and as a territory but not as a country."
More widely, Moscow's objective over at least a decade and a half has been to build a buffer of compliant and friendly states as a bulwark against expansion by European political and military alliances, the EU and Nato, to its immediate borders. While the job of managing its influence has proved easier in central Asia in Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan –where the ruling elites have largely been drawn from the old Soviet-era nomenklatura – elsewhere it has been more complicated. Islamic separatist movements in the Caucasus have led to long-running security issues. Russia's relations with its near abroad, some analysts argue, have also been complicated by the fact that some of the former states of the Soviet Union, encouraged by a more aggressive western engagement, have been showing signs of becoming more independent from Moscow. This at a time when President Putin has been trying to bind a core group closer with his proposed Eurasian Union, of which he hoped Ukraine would be a key member.
And it has not only been Ukraine that has recently faced economic pressure to toe the line. For Kiev that meant tighter customs controls last year, when Ukraine was flirting with an association with the EU. But Belarus too, although on a far lesser scale, has been punished in the recent past for seeking economic aid from China.
Moscow, for the most part, has relied on a combination of oil wealth and its creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) to pursue an aggressively paternalistic relationship with the former Soviet states. But force is always an option.
The 2008 conflict with Georgia, which was driven by that country's pursuit of articles of association with Nato, saw Moscow using the old Soviet playbook of "political technologies" – or manipulation – to provoke Georgia into an attack on separatist South Ossetian villages, providing the opportunity for an intervention by Russian "peacekeepers".
If Ukraine is different, argues Lough, it is because he believes that the recent events have caught Moscow "flat-footed" – missing the real reason for the revolution.
"
Lough adds: "The question is: what do they do now over Ukraine? They have zero influence over the interim government. They still have powerful economic levers but their best bet would be to slow the process of the revolution consolidating, which probably explains what is happening in Crimea. But it is a very high-risk and dangerous strategy."