The problems in Russia and Ukraine come as automakers and other companies are confronting the currency market turmoil that is hurting prospects in emerging-market countries like Turkey and South Africa that have been considered sources of growth.
The crisis in Crimea “doesn’t contribute to improving the overall situation, that’s for sure,” said Luca Cordero di Montezemolo, the chairman of Ferrari and a director of its parent, Fiat.
Russia, which last year had sales of about 2.6 million vehicles, had been approaching Europe’s leader, Germany, with 2.9 million vehicles, in its importance as an auto market. Europe’s overall auto sales count last year, 11.9 million, was the industry’s worst performance since 1995, and behind the United States market, 15.6 million.
Video
Many carmakers have treated Russia as part of the European market, and sales growth there had helped to compensate for the slump in Western Europe. And yet the Russian economy had been under strain because of what foreign investors regard as a poor climate for business, including rampant corruption and a dysfunctional judicial system.
Bernhard Maier, a member of the management board of Porsche, said that sales in Russia grew 50 percent in 2012 but that the increase would slow to about 5 percent this year. Last year, Porsche sold about 3,790 vehicles in Russia. While that is less than 3 percent of the company’s worldwide total, it is still significant, he said. Porsche has been in the process of expanding its dealer network in Russia from 22 at the end of last year to 32 by the end of 2018.
“Russia is a very important market, simply because of its size,” Mr. Maier said in an interview.
Statements by President Vladimir V. Putin on Tuesday, in which he said he did not intend to annex Crimea, helped ease tensions. But investors’ confidence in Russia may have already shattered, with consequences that will not be easy to reverse. For example, a slump by the ruble is likely to lead to higher inflation in Russia as the country pays more, in local currency terms, for imported goods. Russia is heavily dependent on imports for many consumer products.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
If Russians have less buying power, they may not buy as many cars, said Jérôme Stoll, head of sales at Renault, the French automaker. It has an 8 percent share of the Russian market, and 16 percent through a joint venture with the Russian carmaker Avtovaz.
Renault may be somewhat insulated from currency turbulence because it buys many parts and raw materials locally, Mr. Stoll said in an interview. But that situation may not be enough to offset the negative effects of inflation. “It’s a very complex situation,” he said.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
The conflict between Russia and the United States and Europe, with echoes of the Cold War, comes as the European market is finally looking up. Automakers like Ford Motor reported strong sales increases in Europe at the end of 2013 and so far this year. But, after sustaining the worst slump most have ever seen in their careers, managers are wary about predicting a return to solid growth.
“There is a recovery underway,” Stephen T. Odell, president of Ford of Europe, told reporters. “I’ll take a rain check on how much.”
While nervous, carmakers are hardly about to abandon Russia. For now, they are hoping that the situation will somehow return to normal.
“We take the long view,” Mark Fields, Ford’s chief operating officer, said in the same session as Mr. Odell.
Emerging markets like Russia and India “are where much of the growth is coming from in the auto industry,” Mr. Fields said, adding, “We understand at certain points of time there is volatility.”