“We’re used to the Maidan Yatsenyuk, confused, indecisive,” continued Mr. Pekar, who runs Euroindex, Ukraine’s largest organizer of trade shows. “Yesterday I saw Premier Yatsenyuk, even with a high fever, he demonstrated a sharp mind, deep knowledge of economic processes, awareness of realities, switched easily between Ukrainian-Russian-English, immediate responses to questions and suggestions, sustainable economic liberalism and reformist determination.”
“This,” Mr. Pekar summed up, “is what a person in the right place means.”
Of course, that remains to be seen.
Mr. Yatsenyuk confronts tremendous challenges as acting prime minister, not just because of the Russian military threat and the secessionist push by regional leaders in Crimea, but because of Ukraine’s deep financial problems and need for a large international bailout package. He also faces suspicion from a public that is deeply wary of his past service in the Ukrainian government, long dismissed as a cesspool of corruption and mismanagement.
The military confrontation with Russia, however, has raised the stakes, swiftly propelling Mr. Yatsenyuk beyond the tense negotiations he had expected with the International Monetary Fund and into the middle of a geopolitical firestorm that is perhaps the most ominous confrontation between Russia and the West since the end of the Cold War.
Video
His meeting with President Obama at the White House — a rare invitation for a new leader — was meant to demonstrate Washington’s unwavering support for the fledgling government in Kiev. On Thursday, he is scheduled to visit the United Nations, where he will appeal for international support in advance of a referendum in Crimea on Sunday that regional leaders hope will ratify their intention to secede from Ukraine.
Mr. Yatsenyuk’s appeal in the West, where he is viewed as an able steward fluent in the language of diplomacy and international finance, is already well known because of a recording of a telephone conversation between Victoria J. Nuland, a United States assistant secretary of state, and the American ambassador in Ukraine, Geoffrey R. Pyatt, in which they discussed the possibility of opposition leaders entering the government in late January. “Yats is the guy who’s got the economic experience, the governing experience,” Ms. Nuland said, referring to Mr. Yatsenyuk, in a call during which she also famously directed an expletive at the European Union. In the end, Mr. Yatsenyuk rejected the offer to join the government because it would have left President Viktor F. Yanukoyvch in charge. Even now, it is not clear that Mr. Yatsenyuk will have a future in government beyond the presidential elections on May 25. The top contenders are expected to be the former boxer, Vitali Klitschko, a leader in Parliament who was also leader of the street protests, and Petro Poroshenko, a veteran lawmaker and one of Ukraine’s wealthiest businessman.
Mr. Yatsenyuk had been the leader in Parliament of Fatherland, the political party of Yulia Tymoshenko, the former prime minister who was recently released from prison.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
However the next few months play out, it seems certain that Mr. Yatsenyuk (pronounced YA-tsen-yuk) will celebrate his 40th birthday on May 22 as prime minister.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
It is a role he seems to have been preparing for since childhood. Mr. Yatsenyuk was born in 1974 in Chernivtsi, not far from the border of Romania. His parents were professors at Chernivtsi National University. Mr. Yatsenyuk received a law degree from that university, and he later earned a master’s degree in accounting and auditing and a Ph.D. in economics from the Ukrainian Academy of Banking.
He founded a law firm and then worked for three years as a bank executive before entering public service. His first post was as minister of economics of Crimea, giving him a firsthand understanding of the region that is now trying to break away from Ukraine.
Leonid Grach, a former speaker of the Crimean Parliament, said that Mr. Yatsenyuk was not well liked. He changed the sign on his office door from Russian to Ukrainian, and was called “Little Gulliver” by some colleagues who viewed him as an outsider, Mr. Grach said. “Crimea was an accident for him, and he was an accident for Crimea,” he said.
Back in Kiev, he became deputy chairman and later acting chairman of Ukraine’s central bank, before serving as minister of economy and deputy head of the presidential administration under President Viktor A. Yushchenko, who later named him minister of foreign affairs.
In 2008, he was elected speaker of Parliament, a post he held for just under a year. Even with a long résumé in public service, Mr. Yatsenyuk faces many formidable and politically perilous tasks in addition to the crisis in Crimea. There is unrest in the heavily pro-Russian east of the country and the prospect of devastating trade sanctions by Russia should the conflict deepen.
An article last year examining his swift rise in the Fatherland Party, published on a local news site, News24UA, noted that his success in the rough political arena was belied by his gentle reputation: “Everyone calls him a rabbit, a bunny or ‘our white and fluffy Senya.’ How did it happen that people associate a leader of today’s opposition forces with a meek, innocent animal?”