That song has been used at other demonstrations around the world, but only in Hong Kong is it performed in English and Cantonese. And the version in Cantonese — the dialect of Hong Kong and southern China, whose use Beijing has been working to limit in recent years — was rewritten around the dream of achieving democracy.
Sung by students barricaded in the center of a Chinese city, it gains poignancy from the memory of those other students who died in Tiananmen Square in 1989, and who are mourned publicly in Hong Kong every year, at a huge gathering in Victoria Park. The song’s Cantonese lyrics — by an anonymous protester — express the frustrations of an entire community: “Hand in hand, we fight hard for the right to vote for our future. Why is our dream still just a dream?”
As chance would have it, on Oct. 1st, the holiday that commemorates the birth of the People’s Republic of China, the song erupted on local news channels and live streams on the Web at the same time that the 2012 Hollywood movie of “Les Misérables” was broadcast on televisions tuned to the local affiliate of HBO. This Oct. 1 was also a day that brought particularly large anti-China crowds out in the streets.
At first, attempts by protest organizers to encourage famous artists to record “Do You Hear the People Sing?” were met by nervous refusals; no one wanted to risk their career. But as the protests grew, the entertainment industry gained a measure of courage. Several popular local singers, including Denise Ho, Kay Tse and Anthony Wong, have been seen standing at the protesters’ side. The choice of a Western number depicting a French protest in 1832 adds a soupçon of historical import to the current gathering.
The protesters are also getting their message across the modern, international way by branding their movement with symbols. Many sport umbrellas — real or on stickers, photographs, drawings and in origami — because they have become the ultimate symbol of the movement since protesters began using them for protection against pepper spray and tear gas.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Paul Zimmerman, an elected councilor who was invited to the official ceremony for China’s National Day, made himself a hero to students by quietly unfurling a yellow umbrella on that rainless day. And, of course, demonstrators have been breaking into choruses of Rihanna’s 2007 hit “Umbrella.”
Hong Kong’s mixed cultural heritage runs deep even among the police officers now charged with enforcing Beijing’s will in the territory. Ethnically, the 30,000-strong force is 99 percent Hong Kong Chinese, but its culture is eclectically Western, from its hierarchical structure to its off-duty rituals. At an official dinner a few years ago, I commented that the ceremonial garb included distinctive plaids from Scotland, including the bright red Mackintosh tartan. An officer next to me shook his head. “No,” he said, “that tartan signifies Hong Kong Island officers, and the one over there is from Kowloon.” Then a bagpipe player escorted a man carrying a pewter tray with a shot glass of amber liquid — a wee dram not of whisky, but of Chinese tea.
Scientists have long debated the pros and cons of crossbreeding. Botanists mock the bauhinia, the flower that represents Hong Kong on flags and coins, by pointing out that it is a sterile hybrid. But hear the protesters sing “I hope one day you’ll join us and the world will live as one” to their police cousins over the barricades, and you know the Hong Kong blend produces beautiful children.
Nury Vittachi is a columnist and author based in Hong Kong.