Tuesday’s attack struck Khan Sheikhun, where there are thousands of refugees from the nearby province of Hama who have fled recent fighting. The town is also on a crossroads between Hama and Idlib and is considered vital to any regime offensive towards the northern city of Idlib.
Youssef and many members of his extended family live on the northern edge of Khan Sheikhoun, a town in Syria's Idlib province. On Tuesday, airstrikes battered an area near their local bakery, meters from Youssef's home.
The families are connected by marriage and both come from Khan Sheikhoun, the village in rebel-held Idlib Province that residents said had been hit with chemical weapons earlier that morning.
As Mr. Youssef paced around the parking lot outside the hospital, he said he was scared not just for his wife on the other side of the hospital wall, who had arrived lying motionless on a stretcher, but for his relatives on the other side of the border. Many of them had also been poisoned by the gas but had not been deemed sick enough to be treated in Turkey, whose border is closed to most Syrians.
Story highlights Abdul Hamid Youssef lost his wife and 9-month-old twins in attack on Syrian village
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
This story contains graphic imagery.
As they watched the ambulances come and go outside the hospital in Reyhanli, Mr. Youssef and several of his relatives wondered what President Trump might make of all this.
Images of Youssef cradling his dead babies have been shared widely around the world
(CNN) Abdul Hamid Youssef says the attack shook him from a deep sleep.
Leaping from bed, Youssef scrambled to make sure his 9-month-old twins were still alive. Apparently unharmed, he passed them to his wife and told her to stay in the house.
Rushing outside to check on his parents next door, Youssef passed people staggering and falling in the street.
“If Donald Trump is happy for this to happen to his own people and his own children,” said Mr. Youssef, “then we’re happy to keep Bashar al-Assad.”
Shuffling around in the hospital parking lot, several of Mr. Youssef’s relatives buried themselves in their phones, watching the videos of the morning’s atrocities over and over.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
UK Prime Minister Theresa May said she was appalled by the attack.
Airstrikes hit the rebel-held city of Khan Sheikhoun in Idlib province on Tuesday morning, giving off a "poisonous gas," according to Anas al-Diab, an activist with the Aleppo Media Center.
Story highlights Sean Spicer blamed the Obama administration
A US intelligence official said the attack reportedly killed 58 people, including 11 children.
