More than 400,000 British citizens live and work in Spain, while 100,000 Spanish citizens live in the UK, Mariano Rajoy said.
At every turn, Britain proclaims its singularity. Most countries fly the European flag next to their national flags; Britain doesn’t. Most of Europe uses euros; Britain uses pounds. British airports have a passport line that says “British and E.U. Passports.” British politicians in the last 20 years have increasingly talked about British values and British traditions, about what sets Britons apart from Europeans rather than what they have in common.
“But, above all, it would be very negative for British citizens: the European Union is based, ever since its foundation, on the principles of freedom of movement of people, goods, services and capitals.”
UK citizens, he said, would forfeit crucial rights to live and work across the continent. “Leaving the European Union would mean that British citizens would lose their right to move freely, work and do business within the largest economic area, the largest market in the world,” he said.
“If the United Kingdom left the European Union, it would be very negative for everyone and from every perspective.”
Rajoy’s comments came after the Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, warned that a pledge by Brexit campaigners’ to enact a points-based immigration system would mean British citizens would face similar barriers to travel and work in Europe.
Leave campaigners have argued that new rights for British citizens to live and work in other EU countries could be negotiated after Brexit.
A British citizen living overseas who has been registered to vote in the UK in the past 15 years.
Do you need to re-register to vote in the referendum?
At the same time another more fundamental problem might arise in the wake of a UK referendum leave vote. What if Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales vote remain, their MPs propose an amendment to parliament’s EEA motion in support of the UK’s continued membership of the EU, and pro-EU English MPs vote with them to pass their amendment? The UK would be plunged into a full-blown constitutional crisis concerning the very sovereignty of parliament.
Those on the receiving end of Euroskeptic coverage include President Obama, who, during a recent visit here, supported continued British membership of the bloc and said there would be no quick free trade deal with the United States if Britain quit.
While most of Europe is focused on the flow of migrants from the Middle East and Africa, the Brexit camp contends that immigration can be controlled only if Britain quits the bloc because the European Union allows the free movement of European workers across national frontiers.
The surge of fear lately stems from the so-called Brexit vote. Recent polls are showing that support in Britain for leaving the European Union is on the rise: More voters are backing a departure from the bloc than are opting to stay. If Britain drops out, the future of the European Union could be in doubt, and financial markets would be in for a rough ride.
The IMF said last month that Brexit could spark a stock market crash and a steep fall in house prices. In Saturday’s report to conclude its annual assessment of Britain’s economy, it added that a leave vote would tie the UK up in trade negotiations that could drag on for years.
'Brexit would trigger sterling fall worse than Black Wednesday' Read more
I want people to know what the consequences of leaving the EU would be before they cast their votes, rather than after. A vote to leave could see the week end with a Black Friday, and serious consequences for ordinary people.Spread-betting and trading firm CMC Markets UK was calling the FTSE 100 down 468 points from its overnight close of 6,338 at 5,870. Its chief market analyst, Michael Hewson, said the consequences of the vote looked set to “ripple across the EU and the world”.
The FTSE and pound have been buffeted by close opinion polls during the campaign but in the past week market sentiment has swung to show growing confidence in a vote to remain in the EU. The FTSE has rallied every day this week and by Thursday’s close was up 5.3% for the week so far.What about the 48% who voted to remain?
The vote underlines the final victory of anti-Europeans within the Conservative Party, which had led Britain into what was then the European Economic Community in 1973 when it was a pro-European force.
JUST WATCHED Labour Party leader under fire following Brexit vote Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Labour Party leader under fire following Brexit vote 03:38
The new, emergency government is made up of former opposition politicians from two parties - Yulia Tymoshenko's centre-right Batkivshchyna and Svoboda. A third opposition party, Udar, led by former boxing champion Vitali Klitschko, supports from outside. Maidan activists fill some posts. Yanukovych's Party of Regions, meanwhile, has disavowed its vanished leader and gone into opposition.
The second scenario is that Labour, under a new leader, offers itself as a pro-European party, but promises to seek a new deal on free movement of workers within the EU.
Corbyn’s offence? Ostensibly his failure to campaign hard enough or with conviction and rally Labour’s core voters to back the remain (in the EU) campaign. Given Corbyn’s history as an anti-EU leftist for decades, there was even doubt as to whether he voted remain himself on 23 June. Up to one-third of Labour voters peeled off to Ukip, the populist voice of latent English nationalism and leading leave campaigners.
The arithmetic told us that motivating and mobilising pro-EU voters would be nowhere near enough; we would also need the votes of people whose underlying attitudes meant they would find the leave campaign’s arguments compelling and would be hard to persuade.
“The UK that Scotland voted to remain part of in 2014 is changing fundamentally.”
There is a way Brexiters could really hand back control to voters | Caroline Lucas Read more
There was no emotional argument for the EU that had any resonance with these voters. For committed remain and leave voters, the decision was often passionately held and part of a wider worldview. For the “hearts v heads” voters it was a pragmatic, often transactional, decision. Like almost everyone else, they were worried about immigration – but the economic implications of Brexit mattered even more. Our challenge was to cut through with hard economic arguments – so that head would trump heart. This is where the campaign failed and the referendum was lost.
Within the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign, the referendum often felt like a battle between a simple lie and a complex truth. The leave campaign seemed to have all the best tunes. “Take back control” was a strong, clear message requiring no explanation. It was demonstrably not true that leaving the EU would give the UK £350m a week to spend on other things like the NHS, but endless repetition of that single number meant people heard it and it struck a chord.
On immigration we had no satisfactory answer. For voters who felt this was the most important issue, nothing came close to the simple appeal of ending free movement from the EU, and that was plainly irreconcilable with remaining a member. The Stronger in Europe campaign tested dozens of arguments, but none had any traction with the key in-play voters. Because of the hearts v heads dynamic, many wanted to believe the leave arguments, and disbelieve those forwarded by remain.
One of the few straightforward ways to try to get across the risks of leaving the EU was to point out the overwhelming weight of opinion among economists, businesses, unions – the reviled “experts”. Research established that “independent experts” were top of the list of people whose opinions the swing voters wanted to hear. It turned out that what they really meant was “independent experts who agree with me”. A poll during the campaign found that while remain voters trusted a wide range of experts and professionals, leave voters didn’t trust anyone.
In April 2015, when the nascent remain team first looked in detail at the spectrum of attitudes, the “hearts v heads” voters on balance – and mostly with reluctance – came down in favour of remaining in the EU by 55% to 45%. On 23 June 2016 they voted in favour of leaving the EU by about the same margin. Heart won out over head.
The research that informs political campaigns is much more sophisticated than published polls. We don’t just want to know who is going to vote one way or the other. We need to understand what perceptions and arguments cause people to come to the voting conclusion that they do. This means looking beyond demographic and regional factors to map the electorate on the basis of attitudes and behaviour. We need to identify our core vote – and our opponent’s – and to define, with as much nuance as possible, the voters who are genuinely in play: what they think and feel about the choice before them and which messages, messengers and modes are the most effective in persuading them.
Labour’s traditional voters no longer share its progressive values | Matthew Goodwin Read more
