Corn prices rose last week in Ukraine as farmers held back grain to protect themselves against the country's falling currency.
"These visits will be an opportunity to forge a strong working relationship that we can build upon and which I hope to develop with more leaders across the European Union in the weeks and months ahead," May said in a statement Wednesday.
About 85% of wheat milled in the UK is home-grown and the rest comes mainly from the European Union and Canada. Much of Ukraine's supply goes to the Middle East and north Africa, and it is a bigger supplier of corn than of wheat.
The Chinese company’s chief financial officer, Wai Ming Wong, said on Wednesday: “To the extent that we need to pass things on to the customer, we will.” He said Lenovo would also look for other ways to deal with the cost of the falling pound.
Most computer components are sold in dollars and the pound’s plunge against the US currency has made them more expensive to buy. Other computer makers are likely to increase UK prices following the pound’s fall to 31-year lows this week – a drop of more than 10% since the referendum.
“The recent strengthening of the US dollar versus sterling and other currencies … following the UK’s decision to leave the European Union, will have a direct impact on the price we sell to our UK [business] customers and partners.
“The exact price change will vary across our portfolio, and consumer products are currently not affected,” Dell said in a statement. Dell has ordered a 10% increase in prices, according to the Register website.
The price of cocoa traded in London rose to its highest in almost 40 years on Wednesday in reaction to the pound’s fall. Analysts said the 1.5% jump to £2,495 a tonne, which has eased slightly since, was purely driven by currency movements.
Theresa May’s new administration has received a significant boost from a Bank of England report showing that the economy has been resilient in the first few weeks since the Brexit vote and displays no general signs of slowing down.
Even so, City analysts said the Bank was still likely to announce fresh stimulus measures for the economy next month in anticipation that the better-than-expected economic news since the referendum would not last.
The chancellor, Philip Hammond, said the figures were “proof that the fundamentals of the British economy are strong”. He added: “As the economy adjusts to the effect of the referendum decision, it is doing so from a position of economic strength.”
The Bank’s findings were backed up by the latest trading report from the retailer John Lewis. It said spending in its department stores and at its Waitrose supermarkets were 3.2% higher in the week ending 16 July than they had been in the same week of 2015.
According to the ONS, there were 31.7 million people in work in the three months ending in May, 176,000 more than for the three months to February 2016 and 624,000 more than for a year earlier.
The government’s preferred measure of unemployment, the internationally agreed measure that looks at those without a job but seeking and available to work, fell by 54,000 in the three months ending in May to its lowest level since early 2008, when the economy was in the early stages of recession.
London (CNN) Theresa May is meeting with German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin Wednesday on her first international trip as Britain's Prime Minister, for talks that she hopes will help smooth Brexit negotiations.
Speaking at a press conference alongside May ahead of the working dinner between two of the world's most powerful women, Merkel said that Britain and Germany had friendly relations and shared values.
Bilateral relationships and trade between them would continue after Britain's departure from the European Union, she said.
She said the business of negotiating Britain's exit from the bloc would take time and "require serious and detailed work."
"I want to work with Chancellor Merkel and my colleagues around the European Council in a constructive spirit to make this a sensible and orderly departure," she said.
It is a month since Britain voted to leave the European Union. What difference has it made to our economy and society so far?
November will be the first time we see unemployment figures fully calculated post-referendum, comparing July, August and September 2016 with the months prior to the vote.
The first estimate of Q3 GDP figures that will cover July-September, will not be available until late October. That’s when we will start to know if the leave vote has tipped the economy into recession. The Bank of England didn’t think that had happened, which contrasts with Friday’s Markit survey, but there were already signs the economy was slowing down before the referendum.
The newly set up Department for Exiting the European Union won’t come for free. In PMQs this week, Tim Farron asked about reports that the department would be hiring lawyers “at a cost of £5,000 per head per day”.
The IMF predicts the UK economy will grow 1.7% in 2017, 0.9 percentage points lower than it estimated in April. But if the referendum campaign has taught us anything, it is that predictions about what would happen after a leave vote were tricky to get right.When will the UK actually leave the EU?
The warnings of the economic consequences of the vote have been modified since it took place. It hasn’t been the baptism of fire that many expected for the new chancellor. Nevertheless, there is still concern from global financial institutions about the impact of Brexit on the world economy.
The most recently published unemployment figures show there were 31.7 million people in work and 1.65 million people unemployed. However, these figures are based on comparing the three months to February 2016 and March to May 2016.
