Kiev turns into battleground as police and special forces are issued with combat weapons
But Yanukovych claims he's still in charge, saying he was forced to leave Kiev because of a "coup."
Within an hour, the area surrounding the Ukrania hotel, which had been under the control of riot police, fell to the protesters. The police lines dissolved as they were bussed away to be replaced by the feared "Berkut" special forces. Kiev soon became a battleground.
Protesters were also seen leading policemen with hands held high around the sprawling protest camp in central Kiev. Ukraine's interior ministry said 67 police were captured. They were being held in Kiev's occupied city hall, an opposition lawmaker said.
Map of Kiev showing the site of the recent clashes. Photograph: /the Guardian
"Any further escalation, including the introduction of a state of emergency, or the use of the armed forces against protesters must be avoided," it said.
Ahead of the EU mediation effort, Yanukovych called a truce in the standoff, a ceasefire that lasted about 12 hours only for the clashes to escalate.
Yanukovych's security service chiefs also announced they were launching a nationwide "anti-terrorist" campaign, though it was not clear what this meant or what it would entail.
The Russian prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, said on Thursday that Yanukovych should not be a "doormat", in what seemed the latest words from Moscow urging the authorities to crack down on the protests.
Bogdana Matsotska, a Ukrainian skier, has left the Olympics in "solidarity" with Kiev's protesters. Bogdana's father said he and his daughter were both "extremely angry" Yanukovych.
“In the last three months,” the governor, Andrei V. Shishatsky, said at a news conference, “I did not have a personal meeting with Yanukovych — only phone calls.”
Last week, parliament ousted Yanukovych, the focus of protesters' anger, and authorities issued a warrant for his arrest over civilian deaths. But his whereabouts were unknown.  Lawmakers appointed Turchinov to serve as acting President and fired several of Yanukovych's ministers.
In Sevastopol, residents told CNN they were angry that President Viktor Yanukovych has been forced out and fear that they will be oppressed by the country's new leaders.
Back in Kiev, Andrii Parubii, chief of national security and defense, said Ukrainian military and police forces had stopped Russian military forces from seizing two airports in the Crimean region.
The Ukrainian National Security Council ordered the mobilization as Russian President Vladimir Putin appeared to dismiss warnings from world leaders to avoid military intervention in Crimea, a senior Ukrainian official, Andriy Parubiy, said. The news came as evidence mounted that pro-Russian forces were already in Crimea, an autonomous region of eastern Ukraine with strong loyalty to neighboring Russia.
Eastern Ukraine and the Crimea have closer ties to Russia, while Western Ukraine is more friendly with Europe. Many Eastern Ukrainians still speak Russian, and the 2010 presidential elections divided the country with Eastern Ukraine voting heavily in favor of pro-Russia Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych. On Saturday, the Kremlin issued a statement that Russian President Vladimir Putin told U.S. President Barack Obama that Russia approved military action in Ukraine because it "reserves the right to defend its interests and the Russian-speaking people who live there."
Yet Russian President Vladimir Putin on Tuesday denied sending members of his military into Crimea or that any of the up to 25,000 Russian troops already stationed in the country had any role in the standoff, according to the state-run RIA Novosti news agency. He insisted his military isn't planning to seize the Crimean peninsula -- but didn't close the door on action "to protect local people." 
Public clashes between Ukrainians and Russians in the main square in Sevastopol. Ukrainians protesting at Russian interference; Crimean Russians demanding the return of Sevastopol to Russia, and that parliament recognise Russian as the state language. Ukrainian deputies barred from the government building; a Russian "information centre" opening in Sevastopol. Calls from the Ukrainian ministry of defence for an end to the agreement dividing the Black Sea fleet between the Russian and Ukrainian navies. The move is labelled a political provocation by Russian deputies. The presidium of the Crimean parliament announces a referendum on Crimean independence, and the Russian deputy says that Russia is ready to supervise it. A leader of the Russian Society of Crimea threatens armed mutiny and the establishment of a Russian administration in Sevastopol. A Russian navy chief accuses Ukraine of converting some of his Black Sea fleet, and conducting armed assault on his personnel. He threatens to place the fleet on alert. The conflict escalates into terrorism, arson attacks and murder.
Russia's occupation of Crimea may or may not reflect Putin's paranoia at the west's muscle-flexing along its border. Kiev's fight for independence may or may not reflect a justified fear of Russian revanchism. I do not know. I know only that neither country threatens us, and neither "belongs to us". Some people just cannot bear to be left out of a fight.In this light, the current Russian intervention in Ukraine is neither the impulsive overreaction of the Kremlin to the loss of an ally, nor result of Vladimir Putin's deficient touch with reality. 
Crimea will vote on Sunday in a ballot referendum that leaders of the regional Parliament expect will ratify their decision to break away from Ukraine and become part of Russia. The referendum will offer two choices, neither one of them “no”:
The United States has already said it expects the Black Sea peninsula's majority ethnic Russian population to vote in favor of joining Russia. Moscow has strongly backed the referendum.
The US president, Barack Obama, told his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, on Sunday that Crimea's vote "would never be recognised" by the United States, as he and other US officials warned Moscow against making further military moves toward southern and eastern Ukraine.
“Crimea, we’re with you!” was one.
It's official, Crimea is Russian. In the words of Vladimir Putin, "In people's hearts and minds, Crimea has always been an inseparable part of Russia." Indeed Russia said that in Sunday's referendum 97% of its participants, mostly ethnic Russians, insisted that to belong to the Great Russia versus Small Russia (Malorossiya, another name for Ukraine) had been their dream for 60 years since the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, my great-grandfather, transferred the peninsula's jurisdiction to Kiev. 
The Syrian government, not unlike President Obama’s critics in Washington, sees the recent events as part of a decline in America’s influence and a rise in Russia’s. By meddling in the affairs of other countries, from Iraq to the former Soviet countries, said one prominent businessman and political observer in Syria, the United States provoked the world and squandered its position as the sole global power after the Soviet Union’s collapse.
Further sanctions which would target Russia's economic interests are threatened by both the European Union and the United States if Moscow does not act to deescalate the situation. 
Western countries and Japan have suspended their 16-year collaboration with Russia in the G8 group in response to the annexation of Crimea and have threatened sweeping sanctions in the event of any Russian military moves in the region.
News of the proposed changes came during Obama's trip to Europe, where he's mobilizing support for isolating Russia over its military occupation and annexation of Crimea from Ukraine.
A senior U.S. defense official told CNN Russia "has enough troops that we believe they could move against Ukraine at any time now." 
Russia insists its actions are legitimate. Crimea had belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine. The region also has a majority ethnic Russian population and other long historic ties to Russia. 
Also Monday, Russia's Foreign Ministry announced it was issuing retaliatory sanctions against 13 Canadian public figures, in response to a similar move by Canada last week against Russian officials over the Crimean situation, RIA-Novosti reported.
As of March 18, Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said that Ukraine would not be seeking NATO membership, a move designed to placate Russia as well as Ukraine's large Russian-speaking population. 
The move to suspend Russia's membership in the G8 is the latest direct response from major countries allied against Russia's annexation of Crimea. 
While Democratic and Republican lawmakers in the United States are stepping up their calls to provide Ukraine with light arms and other military aid, administration officials have argued that sanctions put in place so far must be given time to take hold. 
"(Putin) has put all the military units he would need to move into Ukraine on its eastern border and is doing exercises. We see him moving forces in the south in a position where they could take the southern region over to Moldova," Rogers said on NBC's "Meet the Press."
President Barack Obama and congressional leaders described similar proposals Tuesday for ending the National Security Agency's sweeping collection of bulk telephone records.
Supreme Allied Commander Europe Gen. Philip Breedlove said that Russia had a large force on Ukraine's eastern border and that he was worried it could threaten Moldova's separatist Transnistria region.
"Russia is acting much more like an adversary than a partner," Breedlove said, speaking at an event held in Brussels, Belgium, by the German Marshall Fund think tank.
Ukraine's new leaders -- who took office after months of protests forced President Viktor Yanukovych, a Russian ally, from office -- as well as the United States and other Western powers say Crimea is still a part of Ukraine.
Obama and other world leaders decided to end Russia's role in G8, the group of leading industrialized nations plus Russia, the White House said Monday.
"G8 is an informal organization that does not give out any membership cards and, by its definition, cannot remove anyone," he said during a news conference. "All the economic and financial questions are decided in G20, and G8 has the purpose of existence as the forum of dialogue between the leading Western countries and Russia. 
The G7 had already suspended preparations for a planned G8 summit in the Russian city of Sochi. Monday's comment by Cameron's representative ruling the meeting out altogether comes as the West tries to increase Moscow's isolation over its actions in Ukraine.
EU leaders imposed a new round of sanctions against 12 people last week, bringing the total number of people facing EU asset freezes and travel bans to 33. Canada also announced its own sanctions against Russian officials last week.
The United States announced its own new round of sanctions against 20 people and a bank that U.S. officials say is linked to Putin and senior Russian officials. Washington had already announced sanctions on 11 people.
Russia responded with its own list of sanctions against a number of U.S. lawmakers and officials.
Services like Twitter and Instagram may be used to capture events in real-time, and YouTube may be used for recruitment, training and propaganda purposes.
Russian CyberCommand is another group of hackers, some of whom are Russian, who oppose Putin's annexation of Crimea and have been relentless in their attacks against Russian businesses and agencies such as Rosoboronexport -- Russia's sole agency authorized to sell defense and dual-use products and technologies to foreign entities -- and SearchInform.ru -- a Russian IT security company that provides services to Gazprom, Skolkovo, and other important organizations.
While the name Anonymous is frequently associated with cyberoperations that support revolutionary movements, that wasn't the case with these next two groups: Anonymous Ukraine and CyberBerkut, both of whom are Pro-Russia groups.
The group's logo and name come directly from Ukraine's old special police unit "Berkut" and there are rumors that the group is composed of either Ukrainian or Russian former security services personnel.
President Barack Obama and other world leaders have decided to end Russia's role in the group of leading industrialized nations, the White House said Monday.
"G8 is an informal organization that does not give out any membership cards and, by its definition, cannot remove anyone," he said during a news conference. " All the economic and financial questions are decided in G20, and G8 has the purpose of existence as the forum of dialogue between the leading Western countries and Russia."
In a nod to political and economic reforms, the United States, Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, and Italy added Russia to their group in 1998 -- transforming it from the G7 to the G8.
Western powers have imposed sanctions and other penalties against specific people in Russia close to President Vladimir Putin.
Those additional sanctions could be prompted if Russia further escalates its incursion into Ukraine, which the official defined as sending troops beyond Crimea into the southern or eastern parts of the country. Violence in the contested peninsula could also trigger further sanctions.
