More than 400,000 British citizens live and work in Spain, while 100,000 Spanish citizens live in the UK, Mariano Rajoy said.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Citizens have begun burying the bodies of people killed in Khan Sheikhun. Photograph: Fadi Al-Halabi/AFP/Getty Images
“But, above all, it would be very negative for British citizens: the European Union is based, ever since its foundation, on the principles of freedom of movement of people, goods, services and capitals.”
UK citizens, he said, would forfeit crucial rights to live and work across the continent. “Leaving the European Union would mean that British citizens would lose their right to move freely, work and do business within the largest economic area, the largest market in the world,” he said.
British expats in Spain, many of them retired, have expressed concern about access to healthcare after a potential leave vote. UK citizens are entitled to healthcare via the European health insurance card or free health insurance from the Spanish government under EU law, but Spain would not be obliged to continue to offer free healthcare to non-EU citizens.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Mariano Rajoy. Photograph: Juan Medina/Reuters
Leave campaigners have argued that new rights for British citizens to live and work in other EU countries could be negotiated after Brexit.
A British citizen living overseas who has been registered to vote in the UK in the past 15 years.
How do you vote?
At the same time another more fundamental problem might arise in the wake of a UK referendum leave vote. What if Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales vote remain, their MPs propose an amendment to parliament’s EEA motion in support of the UK’s continued membership of the EU, and pro-EU English MPs vote with them to pass their amendment? The UK would be plunged into a full-blown constitutional crisis concerning the very sovereignty of parliament.
Later this month, Britain may do what no country has done before and vote to leave the European Union.
While most of Europe is focused on the flow of migrants from the Middle East and Africa, the Brexit camp contends that immigration can be controlled only if Britain quits the bloc because the European Union allows the free movement of European workers across national frontiers.
Any “out” vote would not force Europeans to leave Britain, at least not right away. For the next two years, the British government would negotiate new treaties with the European Union over labor movement and other matters.
In the near term, the main risk to Britain’s economy was next week’s referendum, the fund’s directors said. “While recognising that this choice is for UK voters to make and that their decisions will reflect both economic and non-economic factors, directors agreed that the net economic effects of leaving the EU would likely be negative and substantial,” they said in a press release accompanying the report.
The Bank of England, the Institute for Fiscal Studies and the IMF have assessed the long-term economic consequences of Brexit. They suggest an income loss of £3,000 to £5,000 annually per household – once the British economy settles down to its new steady-state five years or so after Brexit. But there are some more immediate financial consequences that have hardly been mentioned in the referendum debate.
I want people to know what the consequences of leaving the EU would be before they cast their votes, rather than after. A vote to leave could see the week end with a Black Friday, and serious consequences for ordinary people.Spread-betting and trading firm CMC Markets UK was calling the FTSE 100 down 468 points from its overnight close of 6,338 at 5,870. Its chief market analyst, Michael Hewson, said the consequences of the vote looked set to “ripple across the EU and the world”.
The FTSE and pound have been buffeted by close opinion polls during the campaign but in the past week market sentiment has swung to show growing confidence in a vote to remain in the EU. The FTSE has rallied every day this week and by Thursday’s close was up 5.3% for the week so far.The result led British Prime Minister David Cameron to issue his resignation this morning. He had been campaigning for the U.K. to remain in the EU.
In London, the maneuvering began almost immediately to succeed Mr. Cameron, who said he would stay on while his Conservative Party went through the process of settling on a new leader. Among the most prominent of the possible candidates is Boris Johnson, the former mayor of London who was a leader of the Leave campaign. He praised Mr. Cameron as an “extraordinary politician” while saying he was sad to see him go.
Cameron said Monday that Scotland's Parliament did not have the legal power to veto the referendum result, a position backed by Mark Elliott, professor of public law at the University of Cambridge.
More recently, Yanukovych's Russification policies set off a counter-reaction and bumped up the popularity of Svoboda ("Freedom") – a radical Ukrainian nationalist party that enjoys support in the west of the country, particularly in Galicia, and polled over 10% in the 2012 elections – winning 38 seats in the 450-strong parliament. Led by Oleh Tyahnybok, Svoboda is now part of Ukraine's government, holding four cabinet positions, including deputy prime minister.
Mr. Cameron has always been threatened by Mr. Johnson; his efforts to slough off the mayor as a kind of amusing Tory mascot never worked. But it wasn’t until Mr. Johnson betrayed the prime minister by throwing his support behind the Brexit campaign that the party saw the extent of his ambition.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Michael Gove, left, and Boris Johnson, faces of the Leave campaign, the day after the EU referendum result. Photograph: Reuters
At 62%, almost two-thirds of Scots who took part in last month’s referendum on EU membership voted to remain, prompting the SNP’s leader and Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, to say that the leave result made another vote on Scottish independence highly likely.
“While Scottish independence has been mooted in the wake of the vote to leave the EU, a new referendum is not currently on the table.
Boris read classics at Oxford and knows well the fate of demagogues in the ancient world who aroused the hopes and passions of the common man and woman, then failed to deliver.
Just 48 hours ago, Boris Johnson was expected to win easily. Few who knew the clever, lazy, disorganised loner with shambolic box office appeal – known always as Boris, never Johnson – well think his removal is anything but good news for the serious pursuit of national goals in tough times. The result will be less fun, but may better suit a serious public mood.
Within the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign, the referendum often felt like a battle between a simple lie and a complex truth. The leave campaign seemed to have all the best tunes. “Take back control” was a strong, clear message requiring no explanation. It was demonstrably not true that leaving the EU would give the UK £350m a week to spend on other things like the NHS, but endless repetition of that single number meant people heard it and it struck a chord.
In the Tory laundry basket, Michael Gove is the dirtiest item | Marina Hyde Read more
The detailed analysis of the result suggests that the dividing lines of politics are shifting: as Tony Blair put it, left v right is being supplanted as the driver of political alignment by open v closed – and Britain is split on those lines more or less 50/50. The referendum was decided by people who voted on the basis of national identity and in defiance of rational economic self-interest. The result made clear the existential threat that this poses to the Labour party now – and in the foreseeable future, unless it can square the circle, to the Conservative party too.Forty-six percent of respondents said they would rather live in a Scotland that was still part of the UK after it had left the EU, compared with 37% who would rather live in an independent Scotland within the EU. The numbers become 55% to 45% once “don’t knows” are removed.
