Though the strike was settled, its significance has not been lost on China’s government. In an industrial landscape that often looks more like the 19th than the 21st century, the internet is rapidly changing workplace dynamics.
On Monday, he met a delegation of some of Hong Kong’s wealthiest tycoons, many of whom have argued that street protests like those threatened by Occupy Central would imperil the city’s reputation for business-friendly stability. In published comments afterward, he told the business leaders that the Chinese government’s basic policies on Hong Kong “have not changed and will not change,” Xinhua, the state-run news agency, reported.
Now, on top of technology and a changed economic situation, there is the example of Occupy Central. This peaceful mass movement for democracy in Chinese-administered Hong Kong has brought hundreds of thousands to the streets, mobilised different sections of society, and used the same tools – internet, social media and occupied space – as the horizontal movements in Europe and the US. “China is different”, the perennial excuse of Sinologists for the population’s failure to rebel against Communist party rule, looks hollow since Occupy Central began.
In the 1990s, when the Chinese government was still dealing with the remnants of an old, industrial, relatively privileged working class, concentrated in heavy industries, worker unrest was treated as tantamount to treason. The initial years of rapid expansion brought chaos and brutality. But before long, official Chinese unions began to organise the migrant workforce, and workers were given basic legal rights. This “normalisation” of labour relations is not threatened by the outbreak of strikes this year. But information technology injects a new dynamic.
The Chinese central government said that it is "confident" that the Hong Kong government can handle the movement lawfully, according to a report in Chinese state media. The Chinese government opposes all illegal activities that "could undermine rule of law and jeopardize 'social tranquility,'" the report says.<U+200B>
The main question burning in the minds of most Hong Kongers is how this will all end – and almost everyone involved can surmise a worst-case scenario. Hong Kong’s former security chief Regina Ip said on Monday that the city government fears a “mini-Tiananmen” – presumably that the protests would be violently dispersed, perhaps by the Chinese military. Nobody wants to see a repeat of 4 June 1989, when Beijing dispatched the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) to open fire on peaceful pro-democracy protesters. The PLA maintains a garrison in Hong Kong, but Leung said in a televised address on Monday morning that the Hong Kong government would not call in the troops. Chinese state media has also emphasised the central government’s confidence in Hong Kong authorities to deal with the protests themselves. That said, the protests continue to escalate, and Beijing seems ready to stand its ground, no matter what the cost.
"I think the 'Occupy Central' movement is the Hong Kong version of so-called street politics and color revolutions we've seen in other countries," Chen Zuo'er, who helped facilitate the handover of Hong Kong to China from Britain, told CNN Wednesday, as China marked National Day -- the foundation of the People's Republic of China on October 1, 1949.  
China has called the protests "illegal" and Hong Kong's leader C.Y. Leung has said repeatedly that China's Communist Party leaders won't reverse a decision requiring a pro-Beijing committee to screen candidates in the territory's first direct elections in 2017.
A day after being elected as chief executive he paid a visit to the central government liaison office, Beijing's outpost in the city and he was the first leader to make his inauguration speech in Mandarin -- rather than the Cantonese that is spoken by most people in this former British colony. 
Demonstrators were already angry that Hong Kong’s chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, had not resigned and they had little faith in the promise of dialogue bringing change.
The Chinese leadership and local officials in Hong Kong must walk a fine line as they seek to suppress calls for more democracy. Already, local police have been criticized for their liberal use of pepper spray and tear gas against peaceful demonstrators. Over the weekend, the situation turned violent as unidentified men assaulted protesters and tore down their encampments in several locations around the city, triggering dozens of arrests, including of individuals identified by the police as suspected members of triads, or organized crime groups.
A June poll by University of Hong Kong researchers showed an increase this year in people identifying themselves as Hong Kongers, while those identifying as “Chinese” and as a “citizen of the People’s Republic of China” dropped to the lowest levels since 1997 and 2007. Those last two categories ranked last among the six ways in which the respondents could choose to identify themselves. “Asians,” “members of the Chinese race” and “global citizens” were all higher, and “Hong Kongers” was first. The university has conducted the poll every six months since 1997.
When pressed for names of activists who might fall into this category, this person demurred. But he went on to criticize the protesters for singing “Happy Birthday” to drown out pro-government hecklers, saying that this was a tactic borrowed from American-backed supporters of democracy in other countries. “It’s peaceful, but it’s a kind of violence,” in that it infringes on the free speech of the demonstrators’ critics, he said.
Joshua Wong, a 17-year-old student leader who has become the face of the protest movement, said the video of the police beating meant trust between police and activists had hit an all-time low.
"The problem with FireChat is that everyone around you can get your message, including the police," explained Hong Kong-based student Michelle Zheng. "If you're discussing your deployment through FireChat, the police know straight away where your weak links are."
Protesters continue to occupy a major thoroughfare in Admiralty, close to the city's financial district and government headquarters, but police have chipped away at the area held by protesters this week by removing barricades and opening roads to traffic.
Shum reiterated the protesters’ core demands: “true universal suffrage” and democracy for the city’s next chief executive election, in 2017. The Hong Kong government, under pressure from central Chinese authorities, has endorsed a more restrictive electoral framework, which would only allow pro-Beijing candidates to run for the city’s top office. Neither side appears willing to back down.
The Chinese artist and activist explores themes of imprisonment, featuring prisoners of conscience from around the world. It's also familiar territory for Ai, who was detained by Chinese authorities for 81 days in 2011 and still cannot travel out of China. 
By Friday afternoon, more than 151,000 people had participated in a poll set up on the Communist Youth League of China’s account on Sina Weibo, a social media platform, asking users how they would choose to boycott the “good-for-nothing artist.”
The Chinese never made good on their threat to invade, in part because they hoped the “one country, two systems” model they eventually adopted for Hong Kong would encourage peaceful reunification with Taiwan, the self-governed island that China claims as its own. China’s leaders also had no interest in disrupting Hong Kong’s wildly successful economy, a vital outlet for foreign trade and hard currency at a time when China was largely isolated from the industrialized world.
The protesters see a clear worst-case scenario, just across the border. Mainland Chinese media covered the protests extensively while almost never showing the demonstrators themselves or articulating their demands. Official editorials repeatedly claim that the movement is backed by “hostile foreign forces” intent on fomenting a “colour revolution” to undermine Beijing. State TV stations interview bystanders who, speaking in Mandarin – which is not widely spoken in Hong Kong – blame the protesters for taking secret payouts to hit the streets.
My generation’s political awakening has been simmering for years. Nearly five years ago, young people led protests against the wasteful construction of a new rail line connecting Hong Kong to mainland China. In 2011, many young people, myself included, organized to oppose a national education program of Chinese propaganda that Beijing tried to force on us. I was 14 at the time, and all I could think was that the leaders in Beijing have no right to brainwash us with their warped view of the world.
Victor Teo of the University of Hong Kong said Taiwan's leader is making progress as he negotiates the thin line between economic pragmatism and sovereignty. 
“Without throwing verbal hand grenades we could actually have made it plain that we thought what was happening in Hong Kong was, to put it blandly, extremely unwise,” he said. “In some ways we may have made it more difficult to resolve.”
"At the moment I saw the tear gas, it made me want to support the students," Hung said. 
“The idea is to make 10 of these, one on each lamppost, lining the street all the way past the P.L.A. building to Central,” he said, referring to the People’s Liberation Army headquarters and Hong Kong’s business district. Mr. Wong, who flew back from Europe when he heard the protests were starting, was getting a helping hand with his installation from a group of working-class men.
But Occupy Central didn't kick off the current protests. Things blew up in late September after three pro-democracy student leaders were briefly arrested at the end of a class boycott, and their supporters tear gassed. That's when tens of thousands of protesters spontaneously came out to occupy Hong Kong's streets, leading to the situation we have now.
A growing number of people in Hong Kong who have taken part in the city’s recent pro-democracy protests aresuddenly finding themselves denied entry into China. The action hasshocked many and sparked widespread belief that Chinese authorities have assembled a blacklist with hundreds, perhaps thousands, of names in recent months.
Another promise was suffrage, and at the heart of the current movement – called the Umbrella Revolution or Occupy Central – is the demand that Hong Kong residents be allowed to choose Hong Kong’s leaders themselves, instead of having candidates pre-vetted by Beijing.
He said he was surprised because he is not a famous figure like the Hong Kong democracy activists and legislators denied entry in the past. He is a Democratic party member, which may have got him tagged, but he suspects his denial was triggered by a 1 July protest he attended – a summer precursor to the current occupying movement that continues to paralyse parts of downtown Hong Kong.
In a well-publicised incident recently, three leaders of the ongoing student protest were stopped while trying to fly to Beijing to confront Chinese leaders. Their case– staged in part as a form of protest – drew international headlines, but subsequent cases have been more surprising because they involve relative unknowns– not leaders – whomerely participated in protests among hundreds of thousands of others.
Many recently denied entry attended that same summer protest, which drew one of the biggest pro-democracy crowds in recent years. More than 500 were arrested and released with warnings.
For theyoung design student, who was also arrested at the 1 July protest and released on 2 July,not having access to China may mean buying costlier, inferior design materials in Hong Kong and perhaps a lower grade in her classes. She remains deeply rattled from her interrogation by border guards. But if she had to do it all over again, she would have attended the protests just the same, she said. “I have nothing to be ashamed of. I have no regrets about what I did.”
