Corn prices rose last week in Ukraine as farmers held back grain to protect themselves against the country's falling currency.
Both Scotland and Northern Ireland, constituent countries within the United Kingdom, voted in the referendum to remain in the EU, and the vote to leave has revived talk in both countries of leaving the UK instead.
Prices of computers and chocolate are likely to rise in early signs of inflation spurred by the falling value of the pound since Britain voted to leave the EU.
Following the June 23 vote to leave the EU, Britain now faces a complicated process of negotiations to remove itself from the bloc.
“The recent strengthening of the US dollar versus sterling and other currencies … following the UK’s decision to leave the European Union, will have a direct impact on the price we sell to our UK [business] customers and partners.
The remain campaign predicted higher prices if Britain voted to leave the EU due to the higher cost of imports from the pound’s likely fall. Economists are predicting further falls in sterling’s value as the economy slows and some have raised the prospect of the pound slumping to parity with the US dollar.IMF cuts UK growth forecasts following Brexit vote Read more
But Merkel said that while the general issue of the impending Brexit would be broached, neither formal nor informal negotiations on the subject could begin until Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty -- which officially kicks off the exit process and opens a two-year window for exit negotiations -- was triggered.
Speaking after Merkel, May said that both sides wanted to maintain "the closest possible economic relations between our two countries, and I believe that is what German and British business want too."
She said the business of negotiating Britain's exit from the bloc would take time and "require serious and detailed work."
"All of us will need time to prepare for these negotiations and the United Kingdom will not invoke Article 50 until our objectives are clear. And that's why I've said already, this will not happen before the end of this year."
It is a month since Britain voted to leave the European Union. What difference has it made to our economy and society so far?
When will the UK actually leave the EU?
The first estimate of Q3 GDP figures that will cover July-September, will not be available until late October. That’s when we will start to know if the leave vote has tipped the economy into recession. The Bank of England didn’t think that had happened, which contrasts with Friday’s Markit survey, but there were already signs the economy was slowing down before the referendum.
The newly set up Department for Exiting the European Union won’t come for free. In PMQs this week, Tim Farron asked about reports that the department would be hiring lawyers “at a cost of £5,000 per head per day”.
The IMF predicts the UK economy will grow 1.7% in 2017, 0.9 percentage points lower than it estimated in April. But if the referendum campaign has taught us anything, it is that predictions about what would happen after a leave vote were tricky to get right.