Standing outside Donetsk's coal mine, Igor Yefremov mused over the future of Ukraine's heavy industry. "If we join the European Union our mines and factories will shut down," he said. "Already the orders from Russia are drying up. Russia doesn't want us because of the chaos in Kiev."
Obama said he hopes that Russia will walk through the "door of diplomacy" but that its annexation of Crimea means the United States and European Union will increase their sanctions.
It has been a tumultuous month for Ukraine. There has been a revolution in Kiev, the abrupt exit of the country's pro-Russian president, Viktor Yanukovych, and military occupation. Russia has seized Crimea, denounced the country's new interim government as "fascist" and launched an all-out information war to justify Crimea's annexation.
But in the heavily industrialised Donbass area of eastern Ukraine, many are wondering what this geopolitical tug of war might mean for them. The Donets basin – the political home of Yanukovych and his Party of Regions – hosts numerous Soviet-era factories: machine-building works, steel and chemical plants, mines, and medium-sized businesses that make fridges.
Donetsk was founded in the 1860s by an enterprising Welshman, John Hughes, who constructed its first steel mill. In recent febrile weeks some pro-Russian campaigners have been calling for Donetsk to follow Crimea and join Russia. More than 7,000 Ukrainians, though, have voted in a spoof online referendum for the city of 1 million to become part of another state – the United Kingdom.
In recent weeks, Washington has imposed sanctions on senior Russian officials and what officials called "cronies" of Putin, as well as a bank, after warning Putin against annexing Crimea from Ukraine.
The Russian Foreign Ministry said the U.N. vote -- which followed Moscow's annexation of Ukraine's Crimea region last week on the basis of the hastily called referendum -- would do nothing to help resolve the situation.
Russia set out a series of tough conditions on Sunday night for agreeing a diplomatic solution to the crisis over its annexation of Crimea, demanding that the US and its European partners accept its proposal that ethnic Russian regions of eastern and southern Ukraine be given extensive autonomous powers independent of Kiev.
The Russian has drawn international condemnation over his support for Syria's Bashar al-Assad and annexation of the Crimean region of Ukraine.
There was no direct confirmation from Russian officials. The Kremlin’s statement describing the same telephone conversation made no mention of any troop withdrawals. It said only that the leaders “discussed various aspects of the situation in Ukraine, including the possibility for international involvement in restoring stability” and that the pair had also talked about constitutional overhaul in Ukraine and another troubled region of Eastern Europe, the separatist Transnistria region of Moldova.Macron described the two leaders’ conversation as “extremely frank and direct”, saying he had made clear “everything I thought on different subjects”. He said he would be “constantly vigilant” about gay rights in Chechnya, where Russian officials are actively investigating claims of a purge of gay men.
For his part, Putin warned that sanctions against Russia over Ukraine would “in no way” resolve the crisis. Both leaders agreed the time was right for a new round of peace talks on Ukraine.
At the same time, a European Union counter-propaganda unit detected an upsurge in pro-Kremlin fake news on the political crisis, playing up the tensions.
Catalan independence: EU experts detect rise in pro-Kremlin false claims Read more
