Story highlights Boris Johnson appointed new UK Foreign Secretary
Yet when Mr. Cameron announced his resignation after the referendum, Mr. Johnson’s hopes of succeeding him as Conservative Party leader were undermined by another Brexit supporter, Justice Secretary Michael Gove, who threw aside his support for Mr. Johnson and announced his own candidacy. Mr. Gove argued that Mr. Johnson was not up to the job.
Among other appointments, Ms. May promoted Amber Rudd, former energy secretary, to home secretary. That ensures that one of the biggest political offices — and Ms. May’s old job — remains in the hands of a woman. The new prime minister chose Philip Hammond, who had been foreign secretary, as chancellor of the Exchequer, replacing George Osborne, a close Cameron ally.
(CNN) After just two weeks in the political wilderness, Boris Johnson is back.
The response to the decision by new UK Prime Minister Theresa May to appoint Johnson Foreign Secretary has been largely one of shock, even among the former London Mayor's supporters. Johnson actively campaign for the UK to leave the European Union -- May was a Remainer -- and backed her rival to be Conservative Party leader.
Even so, Mr. Johnson’s elevation to such a prestigious post represents a remarkable change of fortunes in a career that has had its share of them. He played a key role in the extraordinary national dramas of the last few months, abandoning Mr. Cameron, who desperately tried to keep Britain in the European Union, and cheerfully becoming the public face of the Brexit campaign.
There was also the unlikeliness of making Johnson -- who has a history of insulting foreign leaders and overseas gaffes -- Britain's chief diplomat.
Upside: Boris Johnson as UK Foreign Secretary is an absolute godsend for social media satire.
Boris Johnson is in charge of MI6.
Ms. May has effectively handed Mr. Johnson, Mr. Davis and Mr. Fox the responsibility for successfully carrying out the withdrawal — known as Brexit — which they repeatedly promised would yield new opportunities.
Boris Johnson is James Bond's boss.
Ladies and gentlemen, our new Foreign Secretary.https://t.co/DLslNUbQst — Paul Beadle (@paulbeadle) July 13, 2016
May's plan with Boris Johnson seems to be "let's put this buffoon in a position of power so he'll discredit himself. What could go wrong?" — Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet) July 13, 2016
"The problem is not that we were once in charge [in Africa] but that we are not in charge any more." Boris Johnson, 2002 — Michael Rosen (@MichaelRosenYes) July 13, 2016
Say hello to Britain's new lead ambassador to the world, Mr. Boris Johnson pic.twitter.com/FUjyjhimyV — Historical Pics (@HistoricalPics) July 13, 2016
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson's first official meeting with President Obama will be interesting. Suggest it starts with the word "sorry" — Chuka Umunna (@ChukaUmunna) July 13, 2016
Boris Johnson as Foreign Secretary. So this is, in fact, the year we all die. — Warren Ellis (@warrenellis) July 13, 2016
Boris Johnson is appointed foreign secretary. — Ricky Gervais (@rickygervais) July 13, 2016
How can Boris Johnson be Foreign Secretary when he can't even maintain diplomatic relations with Liverpool? — Rosie Fletcher (@rosieatlarge) July 13, 2016
