(CNN) Forces loyal to Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan quashed a coup attempt by some members of the military that began Friday evening and devolved into turmoil and violence.
'Stunned resignation': readers' experiences of the Turkey coup attempt Read more
At least 290 died and more than 1,400 were wounded, according to Turkey's Foreign Ministry. Around 6,000 people have been detained so far.
Turkey Blocks, a group that tracks censorship in Turkey, tweets that all three services are blocked in the country. Dyn, another service that tracks Internet performance globally, reports that Facebook and Twitter are blocked for "about an hour."
Turkish state broadcaster TRT says it has been taken over by members of the military who were part of the coup attempt.
Saturday, 12:26 a.m. : Hours after the attempted coup against him began, : Hours after the attempted coup against him began, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan addresses the nation via FaceTime.
Confronting a coup
JUST WATCHED Turkey has a long history of military coups Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Turkey has a long history of military coups 00:56
Turkey's deputy prime minister, Mehmet Simsek, tells CNN by phone that the government is in full control after a failed coup attempt.
Video footage from Istanbul's Bosphorus Bridge shows soldiers apparently involved in the coup attempt surrendering en masse, walking away from tanks and abandoning their posts.
Daylight brings clearer pictures of the coup's chaos.
12:20 p.m.: Prime Minister Binali Yildirim tells a news conference the attempted coup is a "stain on democracy".
7:30 p.m.: Erdogan speaks to another cheering, flag-waving crowd, blaming the coup attempt on rival Fethullah Gulen, a cleric and former ally who lives in exile in Pennsylvania.
Erdoğan refuses to rule out execution of failed Turkey coup leaders Read more
Eight Turkish officers who fled to Greece by military helicopter during last week’s attempted coup have been handed suspended sentences by a Greek court, removing a potential obstacle to their extradition back to Turkey.
Turkey coup attempt: Erdoğan declares three-month state of emergency Read more
Since the coup attempt in Turkey on 15 July that left at least 265 people dead and more than 1,000 wounded, tens of thousands of military personnel, judges, prosecutors and civil servants have been detained or suspended from their jobs as part of the investigation into possible plotters. The Turkish government immediately fingered US-based cleric Fethullah Gülen, a long-time ally of Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan now turned foe, as the mastermind of the attempted military takeover.
Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Police try to stop people from attacking a judge, suspected in the failed coup plot, in Erzurum, Turkey on Tuesday, July 19. Turkey has fired or suspended about 50,000 people as the government intensifies a crackdown following last weekend's failed coup attempt. Teachers, journalists, police and judges have been affected. Hide Caption 1 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Police escort Turkish soldiers, accused of taking part in the attempted coup, as they leave a courthouse in Istanbul's Bakirkoy neighborhood on Saturday, July 16. Hide Caption 2 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish police officers cover the eyes of soldiers as they are transported in a bus from the courthouse in Istanbul on July 16. Hide Caption 3 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Akin Ozturk, front row, center, a four-star general and former commander of the Turkish air force, is among those in police custody whom President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's government has accused of having led the failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 4 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey In a mass detention in Ankara, dozens of detainees are forced to kneel, partially stripped. Hide Caption 5 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A man waves a Turkish flag from a car roof during a July 16 march around Kizilay Square in Ankara after the attempted military coup. Hide Caption 6 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Damaged vehicles are abundant outside the presidential palace in Ankara on July 16. Hide Caption 7 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People kick and beat a Turkish soldier suspected in the attempted coup on Istanbul's Bosphorus Bridge on July 16. Hide Caption 8 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Women react after people took over a military position on the Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul. Hide Caption 9 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People gather outside the Turkish Parliament in Ankara during an extraordinary session after the failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 10 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkey Prime Minister Binali Yildirim addresses the Turkish Parliament after the failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 11 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A protester rests on a bench as smoke billows from the Turkish military headquarters in Ankara. Hide Caption 12 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People stand under a huge Turkish flag during a march around Kizilay Square in Ankara in reaction to the attempted coup. Hide Caption 13 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Members of the Turkish military surrender on Istanbul's Bosphorus Bridge on after a failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 14 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People protesting against the coup wave a Turkish flag on top of a monument in Istanbul's Taksim Square. Hide Caption 15 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Clothes and weapons belonging to soldiers involved in the coup attempt are scattered on Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul. Hide Caption 16 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A Turkish police officer in Istanbul embraces a man on a tank in the wake of the violence overnight. Hide Caption 17 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Smoke billows from the direction of the Presidential Palace in Ankara on July 16. Hide Caption 18 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People gather on top of a Turkish military tank in Ankara in the morning after the coup attempt. National intelligence officials said the coup was put down and that the government remains in control. Hide Caption 19 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish people wave national flags from a car in Istanbul. Hide Caption 20 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People gather around a car damaged by a tank in Kizilay Square early on July 16. Hide Caption 21 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People take to the streets near the Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge during clashes with military forces in Istanbul. Hide Caption 22 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People escape the clashes in Ankara early Saturday. Hide Caption 23 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Tanks move into position as Turkish citizens attempt to stop them in Ankara. Hide Caption 24 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Citizens in Sivas rush to the streets during the chaotic coup attempt. Hide Caption 25 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A man approaches Turkish military with his hands up at the entrance to the partially closed Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul. Hide Caption 26 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A wounded man is given medical care at the entrance to the Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul after clashes with Turkish military. Hide Caption 27 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People react in front of the Justice and Development Party's headquarters in Karabuk. Hide Caption 28 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Soldiers secure an area as supporters of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan protest in Istanbul's Taksim Square. Hide Caption 29 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish military members make their way through the streets of Istanbul. Hide Caption 30 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Supporters of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan protest in front of soldiers in Istanbul's Taksim Square. Hide Caption 31 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey President Recep Tayyip Erdogan speaks on CNN Turk via a FaceTime call in Istanbul after members of the country's military attempted to overthrow the government. Hide Caption 32 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish soldiers block Istanbul's iconic Bosphorus Bridge.
“We are here because our compatriots in Germany are standing up for democracy and against the attempted military coup in Turkey,” said Turkey’s sports minister, Akif Çağatay Kılıç, who was at the rally.
The political strife in Turkey has found expression in Germany, which is home to the world’s biggest Turkish diaspora. The North Rhine-Westphalia state, where Cologne is located, is home to about one-third of Germany’s Turkish community.
Erdoğan enjoys a lot of support among the diaspora in Germany and about 1.5 million Turkish nationals living there can vote in Turkish elections. Erdoğan’s Justice and Development party (AKP) received 60% of the vote from Germany in last November’s election, a bigger share than in Turkey."More than 2.5 million tweets -- or over 17,000 per minute -- were reportedly posted (from Turkey) in the first 24 hours after the ban, according to several media reports.
Erdogan and his Islamic regime lifted restrictions on the wearing of hijab in public buildings. He abolished the daily pledge of allegiance to a secular Turkey required in all Turkish schools since 1933. He downgraded the longstanding Turkish relationship with Israel and mused instead about a "neo-Ottoman" role for Turkey at the head of the Middle East's Muslim nations. He and his party passed restrictions on the sale and promotion of alcohol and boldly disavowed the equality of the sexes. 
Turkish voters overlooked and forgave these infringements. They elected and twice re-elected Erdogan. Turkey achieved genuine economic progress during his rule. Ordinary Turks believed that their blunt, traditionalist prime minister cherished their interests in a way his more cosmopolitan predecessors did not.
Erdogan has responded with more censorship and more controls, culminating in the Twitter ban. That ban failed -- yet the underlying problem remains: the country that was once the West's most reliable partner in the Islamic world is not so reliable any more. Turkey defies embargoes to trade with Iran. Turkish foreign policy has sought to build relationships with everyone and anyone except Turkey's traditional Western partners: with Syria, China, Russia, anyone.
The number of public sector workers removed from their posts since the coup attempt is now at more than 66,000, including about 43,000 people in education, the Anadolu state-run news agency reported on Friday. The interior minister, Efkan Âlâ, said more than 18,000 people had been detained over the failed coup and that 50,000 passports had been cancelled.
Turkey's Twitter-banning prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, came to power after a big election win in 2002. Erdogan's party was staunchly Islamic, yet seemingly committed to electoral democracy. Its victory was hailed by many as a hopeful sign for the post-9/11 world. 
More than 1,700 military personnel were last week dishonourably discharged for their role in the coup attempt, which saw a faction of the armed forces commandeer tanks, helicopters and warplanes in an attempt to topple the government. Erdoğan has said 237 people were killed and more than 2,100 wounded.
HootSuite, a Vancouver, Canada-based startup that measures and analyzes Twitter marketing campaigns, said in a corporate blog post that its traffic from Turkey tripled in the first day after the ban.
