(CNN) Forces loyal to Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan quashed a coup attempt by some members of the military that began Friday evening and devolved into turmoil and violence.
“Most of the people who went out in the streets to oppose the coup d’état did not use democratic language,” said Ozgur Unluhisarcikli, the director of the Ankara office of the German Marshall Fund of the United States, a research organization.
At least 290 died and more than 1,400 were wounded, according to Turkey's Foreign Ministry. Around 6,000 people have been detained so far.
Some 300 people gather in Istanbul's Taksim Square, some waving Turkish flags. Army tanks and a military vehicle sit at the square.
Video and photos on social media show large crowds marching through the streets, some taunting soldiers as Turkish military fire guns in the air.
Friday, 11:25 p.m.: A faction of the military issues a declaration, saying the "political administration that has lost all legitimacy has been forced to withdraw."
JUST WATCHED Turkish military seen inside Turkish state TV Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Turkish military seen inside Turkish state TV 00:57
Turkish state broadcaster TRT says it has been taken over by members of the military who were part of the coup attempt.
Saturday, 12:26 a.m. : Hours after the attempted coup against him began, : Hours after the attempted coup against him began, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan addresses the nation via FaceTime.
Speaking to an anchor on CNN Turk, who holds up her phone so viewers can see, Erdogan urges people to take to the streets to stand up to the military faction behind the uprising.
"Go to the streets and give them their answer," he says.
He says lower-ranking officers launched the coup, rebelling against senior officers.
Confronting a coup
Saturday, 1:50 a.m.: Gunshots crack the night at the presidential complex in Ankara and there are reports of helicopters opening fire at the national intelligence headquarters.
Videos and photos posted on social media show crowds marching through the streets -- some marchers facing off against tanks and armored vehicles.
Saturday, 2:51 a.m.: The Turkish National Intelligence unit claims the coup is over.
Meanwhile, there are reports of bombs thrown outside the parliament building in Ankara.
JUST WATCHED Turkey has a long history of military coups Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Turkey has a long history of military coups 00:56
Turkey's deputy prime minister, Mehmet Simsek, tells CNN by phone that the government is in full control after a failed coup attempt.
6:30 a.m.: As dawn breaks, Erdogan is hailed by a throng of cheering supporters. He declares the coup over and says it was treason.
"The government is in control," he says. "Fifty percent of the people elected the President and that President is on duty."
Video footage from Istanbul's Bosphorus Bridge shows soldiers apparently involved in the coup attempt surrendering en masse, walking away from tanks and abandoning their posts.
Daylight brings clearer pictures of the coup's chaos.
Dead and wounded, most in civilian clothes, are seen in street scenes posted online.
And from Ankara, there are pictures of serious damage to the Turkish parliament.
12:20 p.m.: Prime Minister Binali Yildirim tells a news conference the attempted coup is a "stain on democracy".
He says the plotters will "be punished in every way they deserve."
7:30 p.m.: Erdogan speaks to another cheering, flag-waving crowd, blaming the coup attempt on rival Fethullah Gulen, a cleric and former ally who lives in exile in Pennsylvania.
Erdogan demands the United States arrest or extradite Gulen. "This country suffered a lot in the hands of the Gulen movement," Erdogan declares.Facebook Twitter Pinterest The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, addresses the crowd who gathered in front of his residence in Kisikli to protest against the failed military coup attempt in Istanbul. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty Images
Turkey has demanded their return to stand trial for participation in Friday’s coup attempt. The eight deny involvement and have applied for asylum, saying they fear for their safety amid widespread purges in the aftermath of the attempted overthrow of the government.
On the night of the attempted coup, all three main opposition parties condemned the rebellion and expressed their support for the elected president. It was a moment of rare political unity in Turkey, and seemed to have resonance within the wider population. People who protested against Erdoğan’s creeping authoritarianism back in 2013 now said that a coup was not the answer either. “Yes we have problems in Turkey,” Hişyar Özsoy, an MP for the pro-Kurdish People’s Democratic party, said that day. “But at the same time, no military intervention can be a solution.”
“We don’t have full evidence that the government will use this situation to get rid of all opposition,” said Emma Sinclair-Webb, Turkey director for Human Rights Watch.
Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Police try to stop people from attacking a judge, suspected in the failed coup plot, in Erzurum, Turkey on Tuesday, July 19. Turkey has fired or suspended about 50,000 people as the government intensifies a crackdown following last weekend's failed coup attempt. Teachers, journalists, police and judges have been affected. Hide Caption 1 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Police escort Turkish soldiers, accused of taking part in the attempted coup, as they leave a courthouse in Istanbul's Bakirkoy neighborhood on Saturday, July 16. Hide Caption 2 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish police officers cover the eyes of soldiers as they are transported in a bus from the courthouse in Istanbul on July 16. Hide Caption 3 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Akin Ozturk, front row, center, a four-star general and former commander of the Turkish air force, is among those in police custody whom President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's government has accused of having led the failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 4 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey In a mass detention in Ankara, dozens of detainees are forced to kneel, partially stripped. Hide Caption 5 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A man waves a Turkish flag from a car roof during a July 16 march around Kizilay Square in Ankara after the attempted military coup. Hide Caption 6 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Damaged vehicles are abundant outside the presidential palace in Ankara on July 16. Hide Caption 7 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People kick and beat a Turkish soldier suspected in the attempted coup on Istanbul's Bosphorus Bridge on July 16. Hide Caption 8 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Women react after people took over a military position on the Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul. Hide Caption 9 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People gather outside the Turkish Parliament in Ankara during an extraordinary session after the failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 10 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkey Prime Minister Binali Yildirim addresses the Turkish Parliament after the failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 11 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A protester rests on a bench as smoke billows from the Turkish military headquarters in Ankara. Hide Caption 12 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People stand under a huge Turkish flag during a march around Kizilay Square in Ankara in reaction to the attempted coup. Hide Caption 13 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Members of the Turkish military surrender on Istanbul's Bosphorus Bridge on after a failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 14 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People protesting against the coup wave a Turkish flag on top of a monument in Istanbul's Taksim Square. Hide Caption 15 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Clothes and weapons belonging to soldiers involved in the coup attempt are scattered on Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul. Hide Caption 16 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A Turkish police officer in Istanbul embraces a man on a tank in the wake of the violence overnight. Hide Caption 17 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Smoke billows from the direction of the Presidential Palace in Ankara on July 16. Hide Caption 18 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People gather on top of a Turkish military tank in Ankara in the morning after the coup attempt. National intelligence officials said the coup was put down and that the government remains in control. Hide Caption 19 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish people wave national flags from a car in Istanbul. Hide Caption 20 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People gather around a car damaged by a tank in Kizilay Square early on July 16. Hide Caption 21 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People take to the streets near the Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge during clashes with military forces in Istanbul. Hide Caption 22 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People escape the clashes in Ankara early Saturday. Hide Caption 23 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Tanks move into position as Turkish citizens attempt to stop them in Ankara. Hide Caption 24 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Citizens in Sivas rush to the streets during the chaotic coup attempt. Hide Caption 25 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A man approaches Turkish military with his hands up at the entrance to the partially closed Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul. Hide Caption 26 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A wounded man is given medical care at the entrance to the Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul after clashes with Turkish military. Hide Caption 27 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People react in front of the Justice and Development Party's headquarters in Karabuk. Hide Caption 28 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Soldiers secure an area as supporters of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan protest in Istanbul's Taksim Square. Hide Caption 29 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish military members make their way through the streets of Istanbul. Hide Caption 30 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Supporters of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan protest in front of soldiers in Istanbul's Taksim Square. Hide Caption 31 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey President Recep Tayyip Erdogan speaks on CNN Turk via a FaceTime call in Istanbul after members of the country's military attempted to overthrow the government. Hide Caption 32 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish soldiers block Istanbul's iconic Bosphorus Bridge.
Hide Caption 33 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish security officers detain police officers, seen in black, in Istanbul, during a security shutdown on the Bosphorus Bridge. Hide Caption 34 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A military airplane is seen flying over Turkey. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan urged people to take to the streets and stand up to the military. Hide Caption 35 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People take cover near the Bosphorus Bridge as military airplanes fly overhead. Hide Caption 36 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish soldiers are seen on the Asian side of Istanbul.
“We are here because our compatriots in Germany are standing up for democracy and against the attempted military coup in Turkey,” said Turkey’s sports minister, Akif Çağatay Kılıç, who was at the rally.
Erdoğan had been on vacation in Marmaris when the coup attempt occurred. A group of soldiers that raided his hotel is believed to have missed the president by an hour or less.
Earlier on Sunday, state media reported that 1,400 military personnel had been dismissed over suspected links to the exiled cleric Fethullah Gülen – blamed by the Turkish government for the attempted coup. Gülen denies having orchestrated the putsch. The dismissals come a day after Erdoğan moved to bring the military firmly under his control by announcing that the chief of staff would report to him.
More than 1,700 military personnel were last week dishonourably discharged for their role in the coup attempt, which saw a faction of the armed forces commandeer tanks, helicopters and warplanes in an attempt to topple the government. Erdoğan has said 237 people were killed and more than 2,100 wounded.
The number of public sector workers removed from their posts since the coup attempt is now at more than 66,000, including about 43,000 people in education, the Anadolu state-run news agency reported on Friday. The interior minister, Efkan Âlâ, said more than 18,000 people had been detained over the failed coup and that 50,000 passports had been cancelled.
The political strife in Turkey has found expression in Germany, which is home to the world’s biggest Turkish diaspora. The North Rhine-Westphalia state, where Cologne is located, is home to about one-third of Germany’s Turkish community.
The Cologne rally was staged by groups including the pro-Erdoğan Union of European-Turkish Democrats.
Turkish diaspora in EU divided over Erdoğan following failed coup Read more
Erdoğan enjoys a lot of support among the diaspora in Germany and about 1.5 million Turkish nationals living there can vote in Turkish elections. Erdoğan’s Justice and Development party (AKP) received 60% of the vote from Germany in last November’s election, a bigger share than in Turkey.You've probably heard that the Turkish government's attempt to ban Twitter quickly collapsed into farce.
"More than 2.5 million tweets -- or over 17,000 per minute -- were reportedly posted (from Turkey) in the first 24 hours after the ban, according to several media reports.
HootSuite, a Vancouver, Canada-based startup that measures and analyzes Twitter marketing campaigns, said in a corporate blog post that its traffic from Turkey tripled in the first day after the ban.
Turkey is a NATO ally, a candidate for membership in the European Union, a front-line state facing Iran, Syria and Russia -- and it is heading seriously in the wrong direction. A lot of people have invested a lot of time and effort denying that unwelcome news. It can be denied no longer.
Turkey's Twitter-banning prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, came to power after a big election win in 2002. Erdogan's party was staunchly Islamic, yet seemingly committed to electoral democracy. Its victory was hailed by many as a hopeful sign for the post-9/11 world. 
Europe had Christian Democratic parties; why couldn't Turkey have a Muslim Democratic party? Indeed, Erdogan-style Muslim Democracy seemed a decade ago the striking alternative to radical Islamism, a political alternative that would integrate religion into politics while preserving individual freedom and democratic decision-making.
Erdogan and his Islamic regime lifted restrictions on the wearing of hijab in public buildings. He abolished the daily pledge of allegiance to a secular Turkey required in all Turkish schools since 1933. He downgraded the longstanding Turkish relationship with Israel and mused instead about a "neo-Ottoman" role for Turkey at the head of the Middle East's Muslim nations. He and his party passed restrictions on the sale and promotion of alcohol and boldly disavowed the equality of the sexes. 
At the same time, the Erdogan government did initiate important economic liberation of Turkey's traditionally state-led economy. He made concessions to ethnic and religious minorities. It seemed imaginable that Erdogan's reactionary religious message could somehow be fused with modern economics and tolerance. President Barack Obama certainly imagined so: In a 2012 interview with CNN's Fareed Zakaria, the President cited Prime Minister Erdogan as one of the five foreign leaders with whom he'd forged his closest "bonds of trust".
Yet from the start, Erdogan's Islamic democracy had a strongly authoritarian whiff to it. Through the Erdogan years, Turkey has led the world in the number of journalists jailed, ahead of both China and Iran. Erdogan's government banned YouTube for two years beginning in 2007, purged and jailed hundreds of politically uncongenial military officers and reshaped both police and the judiciary. 
Turkish voters overlooked and forgave these infringements. They elected and twice re-elected Erdogan. Turkey achieved genuine economic progress during his rule. Ordinary Turks believed that their blunt, traditionalist prime minister cherished their interests in a way his more cosmopolitan predecessors did not.
Erdogan has responded with more censorship and more controls, culminating in the Twitter ban. That ban failed -- yet the underlying problem remains: the country that was once the West's most reliable partner in the Islamic world is not so reliable any more. Turkey defies embargoes to trade with Iran. Turkish foreign policy has sought to build relationships with everyone and anyone except Turkey's traditional Western partners: with Syria, China, Russia, anyone.
With mass purges of suspected Gülen supporters well under way in all state institutions, the media and some private companies, the Turkish football federation said on Sunday all its affiliated boards had resigned for the sake of “security checks”. It said it was cooperating fully with the authorities.
In an attempt to prevent violence between the camps, 2,700 officers – including several Turkish speakers – were on duty backed up by eight water cannon.
Audio was posted to social media that purported to reveal the prime minister in plots with his son to collect and conceal tens of millions of Euros in illegal cash. (Erdogan has claimed that a corruption investigation that entangled four of his former cabinet ministers is a "coup plot" and that some of the recordings are "immorally edited material".)
