In Hong Kong, anger with the Chinese government runs especially deep among people in their 30s and younger. This week, thousands of university students boycotted classes and attended assemblies to voice their complaints, and on Friday hundreds of high school students also abandoned classes for a day of protest near the government and legislative headquarters.
Quite a few said they had come to a daytime rally despite parental disapproval.
“My mom supports me, but my dad opposed me,” said Oscar Mo Hau-chuk, a slight teenage boy at the protest, where the police gently herded the students behind barriers. “I told him this government is dark, is wrong, because it doesn’t listen.”
As the crowd swelled in the evening, Joshua Wong, 17, a leader of a youth protest group, Scholarism, who recently graduated from high school, said the protesters seemed to be getting younger.
“I thought I was young when I protested against national education at the age of 15,” he told a crowd of thousands, referring to protests in 2011-12 against proposed school curriculum changes that critics said were a vehicle for indoctrination. “Then I saw a 12-year-old today.”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
“I do not want to see, 10 years later, primary school students out there still protesting for democracy,” Mr. Wong said.
After the speeches ended, about a hundred protesters broke away and swarmed a nearby square, next to the government headquarters, as the police struggled to stop others from pouring in and used pepper spray against some in the surging crowd.
The Hong Kong Federation of Students said the protesters took the action after Hong Kong’s government leader, Leung Chun-ying, refused to meet them.
Other protesters on the square were surrounded by a ring of police officers, who warned that none would be allowed to leave. Some of the protesters on the square were arrested, said Yvonne Leung, the president of the student union of the University of Hong Kong. Mr. Wong was among them.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
The confrontation on the streets near the government complex continued into Saturday morning, when hundreds of residents, mostly young, sat in protest on a driveway to the complex and resisted attempts by the police to scatter them with pepper spray. Other residents were held back from joining the protesters by rows of police officers with riot shields. Several prominent leaders of the pro-democracy groups came to speak in support of the protesters, including Cardinal Joseph Zen, a retired Roman Catholic prelate.
The financial heart of Hong Kong, known as Central, could be the scene of similar but bigger confrontations next week, when Occupy Central, the main group opposing the Chinese government’s package of election changes, plans an extended sit-in. Chan Kin-man, a co-founder of Occupy Central, said the protest would probably start on Wednesday, China’s National Day holiday, which is also a public holiday in Hong Kong.
Despite adopting a name similar to Occupy Wall Street, the movement that began in 2011 with protests against economic inequality, the Hong Kong movement has focused on electoral demands, and many of its supporters are middle class, with a few from the city’s financial elite.