We asked people living in Turkey how they have been affected by the military coup attempt. Here they share their experiences
‘The government is calling on its own people to kill its soldiers. I don’t know how we got here’

I was in an army house on the European side of Turkey and after 9pm on Friday we saw jets flying around. A friend’s mother called saying the bridge had been closed by the army and gendarmerie. Since we had friends living on the other side of Turkey we ran to ask for information from soldiers.

Military coup was well planned and very nearly succeeded, say Turkish officials Read more
We noticed one of the soldiers, whose duty was to protect the army house, had put on a bulletproof vest. We asked what was wrong but figured he wouldn’t explain, so said we had concerns about returning to the Asian side of the country. He told us that they received an announcement saying they should all be armed and that they had to prevent people from entering.

A commander arrived and the soldier told him we had concerns and asked him what was wrong. Apparently he had no idea too. The commander was very nervous. He started screaming at the poor soldier for sharing information and called him stupid. Seeing the commander so angry we ran back inside.

My friends started texting me that it might be a coup so we told everyone we neeeded to leave the house. You shouldn’t be in an army house during a coup. We were terrified when my mum called me to leave immediately. There were no taxis or ubers. We hitchhiked to a more crowded non-army place and waited 30 mins for a taxi.

So many people were trying to reach home. Normally it would take 10 mins to get to my place from where I was, but this time it took an hour. One passenger was terrified too. He said he had left his mum, who was returning from vacation, at the entry to Istanbul. We tried to calm him down.

When I reached home I started hearing the sound of jets getting louder. People were rushing to the banks to get money, and to the supermarkets for supplies. I was worried banks wouldn’t have any cash left.

I fell asleep but woke up around 3am because the window was broken. It must have been the jets. Scared, I went back to sleep. When I woke up the next day at 12.30pm, the government were saying how proud they were of killing those who were involved – many like the soldier at the army house.
They called it democratic power. I don’t believe in the coup but this government is one that has punished people for being in the streets! Now they are calling their people to kill their soldiers. I don’t know how we got here. But the future certainly isn’t bright.
Anonymous, Istanbul
Attempted coup in Turkey: what we know so far Read more
‘We’ve speculated whether it was a real coup or a staged one’

We were in the cinema on Friday. We’d taken our younger child, Kaan, aged seven, to see The BFG. It was just after 11pm when my wife’s sister called us. She simply said there was a coup and that the bridges were closed.

Being stoic Brits we stayed put and watched the rest of the film until 11.30pm, then walked home. Kaan was suffering from cramp, but there didn’t seem much urgency among the other people who were around us making their way to safety in the streets of Nişantaşı.

In our fifth-floor flat we tried to follow events on social media. By the time the noises became more dramatic Kaan was thankfully asleep. The most frightening aspect was the sonic booms coming from jets going up and down the Bosphorus. We could also hear gunfire.
Right from the start we speculated about whether this was a real coup or a staged one. Either way, we were sure that the results would be catastrophic, entrenching the president further in power, giving him carte blanche to imprison his enemies, and allowing the country’s leaders to move closer towards an Islamic state.

There is a Turkish saying that this situation is like a stick with shit at both ends, which is something like Hobson’s choice, but somehow in its crudeness more appropriate to the way we are feeling.

On Saturday we ventured out to buy bread. Deliveries had not been made, but otherwise things were normal. There were no visible signs of panic, euphoria, anger, just the stunned resignation of Turks. Living here is never boring.

Anonymous, Beşiktaş
Facebook Twitter Pinterest The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, addresses the crowd who gathered in front of his residence in Kisikli to protest against the failed military coup attempt in Istanbul. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty Images
‘I think the coup attempt was organised by the government itself’

On Friday night we realised that something was going wrong. As always, we could not learn anything from the news channels as they are controlled by President Erdoğan.

We learnt what was happening via Twitter. It was a coup attempt. F-16 jets were flying low over Ankara and helicopters were used to control main government buildings. They dropped bombs on the Turkish grand national assembly for the first time in Turkey’s history. It was horrifying and inexcusable.

I think this coup attempt was organised by the government itself. We have seen different coup attempts in our history and they were all successful. In a coup, a president cannot travel by air as his plane would most likely be shot down by fighter jets. All TV channels would have been closed by the military, and it wouldn’t have been easy to determine all the suspects the next day. I believe the government organised this attempt to strengthen its power and try to eliminate its opponents.

Anonymous, Izmir
‘For many of us it looks like an Orwellian scenario’

For anyone residing in Adana, Friday night was extraordinary. Many people protested against the coup attempt on streets throughout the country, however, these demonstrations were motivated by a slowly imposed ideology of a religious ruling class.

It is clear that a very significant portion of the demonstrators, who responded to President Erdoğan’s call for them to occupy the streets, have no interest in the protection of democracy or civil rights. Arrests don’t seem to be limited to the military personnel under suspicion. Judges and treasury officials are also being removed from office.
A change is on the way in Turkey but in what direction? Will Erdoğan acquire absolute power legally, will the military be hated for years to come or will the economy’s downturn worsen even more? No matter what direction it will take, Erdoğan and the Islamist influence of his ruling party will be steering the boat. For many Turkish citizens it all looks like an Orwellian scenario.

Anonymous, Adana
Military action Turkish Public does not let the soldiers to control turkey Taken 15 July
‘Nobody has the courage to say “I support the coup”. We are afraid’

I am a 23-year-old Turk who followed the coup on TV. I live in a central area which is dangerous to go out in. The problem here is that open-minded and non-religious people are supporting the coup. People know that nothing is going to change if there won’t be a coup or some kind of pressure on the government. Turkey seems like a democratic country because we have elections, but everyone knows that our government is corrupt.
As you can see from photos of the coup, many people who were against it are religious extremists. The real problem is nobody has the courage to say “I support the coup”. Even on social media, open-minded people are too afraid to say it. We are afraid.
Anonymous, Istanbul
‘Some people just can’t stand to see Islamists on the streets and in public spaces’

It is good to see that 90% of society is against the coup and that social media is being used effectively
Arrests and detainments were still happening all over the country on the weekend. People have been gathering together every evening regardless of their political view.

It’s sad to see the international media not covering the entire situation. More than 200 people were murdered by the coup but we blame it all on Sharia law. I would like to highlight again and again that you can see dozens on the streets from very different political backgrounds every night since Friday.

Some people just can’t stand to see Islamists on the streets and in public spaces. If you were to put these people on London streets they would be terrified to see so many cultures living together in peace.

People have still been setting barricades with lorries outside the military bases to prevent potential tank attacks. It is good to see that 90% of the society is against the coup and that social media is being used efficiently.
Anonymous, Ankara
‘All I have is a deep sorrow. Sorrow for my country. Sorrow for fathers and mothers with their kids’
It was a humid, ordinary Istanbul evening. We, as a family with kids and all, were out in Karaköy. On our walk home my phone rang. It was my dad. I could sense the undeclared anxiety in his voice. “Where are you?” he asked. “Something extraordinary is happening out there. Please go home. Now. Please.” He would not say more other than: “Please go home and then we will talk.” My father is 73. He is a man of strength, togetherness and wisdom. He is a man of experience. He has seen and lived it all in this country. As I walked home with my six-year-old son, I could not remove the tone of his voice from my head. It was calm. It was uneasy. It was profoundly saddened.
By the time we were home, in front of the television, constantly checking our Twitter and Facebook feeds (VPN on, of course), we could hear the jets flying above over our apartment building. I witnessed the fear of my six-year-old son. Even if I could turn the TV off (I was unable to), I could not mute the sound of the fighter jets, helicopters and men walking down my street chanting “Allahu akbar!” Nor could I dull the sound from the mosque next to my house, inviting people (more precisely, men) to go to the streets.
Erdoğan refuses to rule out execution of failed Turkey coup leaders Read more
I was a helpless mother with nothing but the calm tone of my voice to soothe a scared child. I was six years old during the 1980 coup in Turkey. I remembered how scared I was when armed soldiers came to take my dad from my house. He was 37. I remember vividly how he tried to hide their guns from my eyes. My voice became calmer, sadder, closer to my dad’s.
Today is a humid Sunday in July. That’s normal for Istanbul. But it’s no ordinary Sunday. A long night of an attempted coup from Friday to Saturday morning left hundreds dead, thousands wounded. The heart of Turkish democracy, our grand national assembly, was bombed four times by our jets of our own airforce. Awakening on Saturday morning, reaching for and instinctively checking for my phone, all I saw on my social media streams were pictures of the dead. Civilians, police officers and soldiers. Images of long-bearded men killing soldiers with their bare hands on the street.
I am, of course, thankful and happy that this coup did not succeed. What an abnormal thing to be thankful and happy for. I do not, however, feel like going in the streets chanting in celebration. I also do not feel like writing (or, frankly, reading) yet another analysis article about what this was, what this will mean. I find the debates on whether this coup was staged or not dehumanising, the male chatter on the rolling news channels unbearable.
As a woman, a mother, as a defender of human rights and democracy, I feel deeply alienated from all this. All I have is a deep sorrow. Sorrow for my country. Sorrow for fathers and mothers on a Friday evening stroll with their kids.

Başak Çalı, Istanbul. Originally posted on medium.com