Supporters and opponents of the Turkish president were united in condemning the coup attempt, but there are still many who do not trust him, and the inevitable reprisals could alienate even more
Turkey coup attempt: Erdoğan declares three-month state of emergency Read more
After Turkey’s failed coup, is President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s grip on power tighter than ever?
According to conventional wisdom, yes. For a start, Erdoğan did what four of his predecessors couldn’t: he survived an attempted coup. The army’s top leadership remained loyal, suggesting that Erdoğan has largely succeeded in taming a high command that had made a veiled threat to topple his government as recently as 2007. He also has the widespread backing of the police, many of whom stood up to the soldiers last Friday.
The scale of Erdoğan’s post-coup purge also suggests that he is in a position of unprecedented strength. Since last Saturday, his government has arrested, detained, fired or suspended more than 50,000 officials. They include not just soldiers, but also policemen, judges, prosecutors, teachers, governors, university deans and employees in the prime ministry.
Erdoğan’s office insists all this has been done according to the rule of law. But the sheer volume of people affected, and the fact that the purge extends far beyond the military, might suggest that the crackdown is being used not just to capture those directly involved in the coup, but also to sideline anyone who represents any kind of threat to Erdoğan.
A crackdown on opponents was already underway prior to the coup attempt. But it has now been hugely accelerated, perhaps because Erdoğan feels that – with thousands having stood up to the army last Friday, and with many still rallying every day in his honour – he now has an increased mandate to do so.
What’s the counter-argument?
All this might be a sign not of power, but of weakness. Erdoğan has survived a coup, but that it was even attempted means that Turkey has not, contrary to what some had assumed, moved on from the era of military intervention. Most soldiers stayed loyal, but more than 100 generals and admirals have since been detained – almost a third of the general corps. Many in the armed forces clearly still harbour doubts about Erdoğan, who has sought to undermine secular and military influence since gaining power in 2003. Had they executed their coup more efficiently, Erdoğan might now be dead or detained.
And while for some the scale of the purge seems opportunistic, to his allies it is entirely necessary, and in fact indicative of the scale of the threat he faces. Erdoğan maintains that the coup was organised by followers of Fethullah Gülen, a US-based Islamic cleric. Thousands of Gülenists have infiltrated the country’s institutions, Erdoğan’s argument goes, and they now need to be weeded out en masse before they can wreak more havoc on the country.
How have recent events affected Erdoğan’s popularity?
On the night of the attempted coup, all three main opposition parties condemned the rebellion and expressed their support for the elected president. It was a moment of rare political unity in Turkey, and seemed to have resonance within the wider population. People who protested against Erdoğan’s creeping authoritarianism back in 2013 now said that a coup was not the answer either. “Yes we have problems in Turkey,” Hişyar Özsoy, an MP for the pro-Kurdish People’s Democratic party, said that day. “But at the same time, no military intervention can be a solution.”
But there is no solid evidence that this feeling of togetherness has translated into a significant boost to Erdoğan’s personal popularity. His existing base has been emboldened, gathering in their thousands every day since the coup attempt. “Till our last breath,” said 42-year-old Adem Çankaya as he attended one rally, “we are here for Erdoğan.”
Outside of Erdoğan’s core support, however, these kinds of displays, coupled with the expanding crackdown, may ultimately serve to alienate as many people as they attract. “Those who liked Erdogan and who didn’t,” argued Soner Çağaptay, a Turkish analyst, “will descend into those who adore him and those who hate him.”
What about his ability to deal with other regional and domestic crises?
An extraordinary month of news – in pictures Read more
Turkey is enmeshed in several conflicts, both at home and abroad, and the upheaval wrought by the coup attempt will hinder Erdoğan’s response to all of them. Erdoğan has reignited a civil war with Kurdish rebels in south-east Turkey, and the arrests of so many senior officers, including the most senior general in that region, will logically hamper the Turkish state’s ability to stamp out Kurdish dissent.
Turkey was also already struggling to deal with a rise in attacks by Islamic State, whose most recent assault saw dozens killed at the country’s biggest airport. The detention of so many security officials, and an increasing lack of trust between the different institutions within the security apparatus, can once again only make it harder to tackle the Isis threat.
Looking west, Erdoğan’s crackdown risks endangering relations with Europe, and specifically the EU-Turkey migration deal, with an increasing number of European leaders speaking out against Erdoğan’s post-coup approach. Finally, the rebel groups who enjoy Turkish support in northern Syria will be wondering what a distracted Turkey means for them.