The United Kingdom European Union membership referendum, also known as the EU referendum and the Brexit referendum, took place on 23 June 2016 in the United Kingdom (UK) and Gibraltar to gauge support for the country either remaining a member of, or leaving, the European Union (EU) under the provisions of the European Union Referendum Act 2015 and also the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000.
The referendum resulted in a simple majority of 51.9% of people voting in favour of leaving the EU.
Although legally the referendum was non-binding, the government had promised to implement the result and it initiated the official EU withdrawal process on 29 March 2017, which put the UK on course to leave the EU by 30 March 2019, after a period of Brexit negotiations.

Membership of the EU and its predecessors has long been a topic of debate in the United Kingdom.
The country joined what were then the three European Communities, principally the European Economic Community (EEC, or "Common Market"), in 1973.
A first referendum on continued membership of the then European Communities (Common Market) was held in 1975, and it was approved by 67.2% of "Yes" voters compared to 32.8% of "No" voters.

In May 2015, in accordance with a Conservative Party manifesto commitment following their surprise victory in the 2015 UK general election, the legal basis for a referendum on EU membership was established by the UK Parliament through the European Union Referendum Act 2015.
Britain Stronger in Europe was the official group campaigning for the UK to remain in the EU, and was endorsed by the Prime Minister David Cameron and Chancellor George Osborne.
Vote Leave was the official group campaigning for the UK to leave the EU, and was fronted by the Conservative MP Boris Johnson, Secretary of State for Justice Michael Gove and Labour MP Gisela Stuart.
Other campaign groups, political parties, businesses, trade unions, newspapers and prominent individuals were also involved, and each side had supporters from across the political spectrum.

Immediately after the result, financial markets reacted negatively but soon recovered, and Cameron announced that he would resign as prime minister and Conservative party leader, having campaigned unsuccessfully for a "Remain" vote.
It was the first time that a national referendum result had gone against the preferred option of the UK Government.
He was succeeded by Theresa May on 13 July 2016.
The opposition Labour Party also faced a leadership challenge as a result of the EU referendum.
In response to the result, the Scottish Government announced that it would plan for a possible second referendum on Scottish independence from the United Kingdom.
