“We wouldn’t be doing this if we didn’t think it was impactful,” Mr. Mnuchin said. “It’s quite impactful.”
It was the second time the United States government has imposed sanctions on Syrians for the government’s use of chemical weapons. In January, the Treasury Department blacklisted 18 Syrians, including six connected to the scientific studies center, after an investigation by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the international body that polices chemical weapons, determined that the government had been responsible for three chlorine gas attacks.
The Syrian government has portrayed the Scientific Studies and Research Center as a medical and agricultural study agency, but the United States government has long considered it a training ground and secret laboratory network for engineers developing chemical and biological weapons.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Britain applauded the American action, calling it a strong message that the use of chemical weapons is unacceptable.
“The abhorrent attack on Khan Sheikhoun is a stark reminder that the international community must work together to deter the future use of chemical weapons in any circumstances,” Boris Johnson, the British foreign secretary, said in a statement. “Sanctions send a clear signal that actions have consequences and seek to deter others from a similar acts of barbarism.”
Syria agreed in a 2013 deal brokered by Russia to destroy its chemical weapons arsenal and get rid of material that could be used to resume the manufacture of such weapons.
But American officials have said this month’s attack indicated that the Assad government still had the capacity to make and use chemical weapons.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
On Monday, one official said that assault and at least one other this month suggested that Syria had an ongoing chemical weapons program and called into question declarations the government had made to the contrary.
Republicans who had long criticized the Obama administration for doing too little to prevent the Assad regime’s atrocities also praised the sanctions.
“They represent another stark departure from the Obama administration’s dithering on Syria, which only worsened the bloodshed and created a vacuum for ISIS,” said Representative Ed Royce, Republican of California and the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee, referring to the Islamic State. He said he would push forward with Democrats on legislation that would “give the White House additional leverage to hold Assad — as well as his Russian and Iranian backers — accountable.”
A report issued by the National Security Council this month that included a declassified account of the Khan Sheikhoun attack said American intelligence had indicated that “personnel historically associated with Syria’s chemical weapons program” were at Shayrat airfield in March and on the day of the assault.
That airfield is believed to have been used by Syrian government warplanes to carry out the attack. President Trump ordered missile strikes on the airfield days later.
An administration official declined to say whether any of those figures were part of the group targeted with sanctions on Monday, citing the need to protect intelligence sources and methods, but asserted that those being blacklisted were believed to be responsible for attacks.