Officials say ‘nobody is talking about that’ as international donors meet in Brussels to discuss the urgent need for aid
Downing Street has downplayed any plans for military action in the aftermath of the deadly toxic gas attack in northern Syria, which the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, said bore the hallmarks of an attack by the Bashar al-Assad regime.
Syria: suspected chemical attack kills dozens in Idlib province Read more
Asked about any prospect of military reprisals, Downing Street officials travelling with the prime minister in the Middle East said “nobody is talking about that”, but said they were hopeful of support from all members of the UN security council at an emergency meeting called by the UK and France on Wednesday afternoon to condemn the Idlib attack.
Russia is likely to veto any resolution against the Assad regime.
Theresa May called it an “appalling” attack. It killed at least 70 people and led many more to be transferred to Turkey in a critical condition.
The prime minister, currently in Saudi Arabia, said the UK would call for the Organisation for the Prohibition of the Chemical Weapons to investigate. “I’m very clear there can be no future for Assad in a stable Syria, which is representative of all the Syrian people and I call on all the third parties involved to ensure that we have a transition away from Assad,” she said. “We cannot allow this suffering to continue.”
Though the attack drew immediate comparisons with the 2013 Sarin gas attack, which prompted a Commons vote on military action against Assad, No 10 sources said no hasty decisions would be taken until the discussion at the UN security council.
The government was defeated in 2013 after Labour and Tory rebels voted down any UK military action.
The Syrian military has categorically denied responsibility for the latest attack. Russia, which is providing military support to the regime, denied its planes were in the area but claimed a Syrian airstrike had hit a terrorist warehouse containing toxic substances.
Idlib has been under relentless air bombardment as one of the last rebel-controlled cities in Syria, despite a ceasefire brokered by Russia and Turkey aimed at laying the groundwork for political negotiations.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest A civil defence member breathes through an oxygen mask, after the suspected gas attack in Khan Sheikhun. Photograph: Ammar Abdullah/Reuters
The attack on Tuesday took place in Khan Sheikhun, a vital crossroads between Hama and the northern city of Idlib. Save the Children said at least 11 children were among the casualties.
Speaking in Brussels, where he is attending an international aid conference, Johnson said all the evidence pointed to the responsibility of the Assad regime and stepped up calls for a political transition in Syria, without specifying how this might happen.
“Objectively I simply don’t see how Bashar al-Assad can remain in charge after what he is already done,” the foreign secretary said. “Of the 400,000 who are estimated to have been killed in Syria, he is responsible for the vast majority of that butcher’s bill. And you have to go a long way back in history to find a tyrant who has stayed in office given such circumstances.”
The foreign secretary called on all members of the UN security council to support a resolution, drafted by the UK and France, denouncing the chemical weapons attack.
“I hope absolutely everyone feels able to support it, because all we are saying is that there should be condemnation of that chemical weapons attack, and secondly that there should be a thorough and urgent international investigation. And I don’t think anybody could possibly, reasonably oppose such a resolution in all conscience.”

Asked about President Trump’s decision to blame the chemical attack on Barack Obama, the foreign secretary said the UK and the US had made a historic decision in 2013 to “vacate the field”, by abandoning plans for military action after a chemical attack at in the suburbs of Damascus. “I am afraid the people of Syria are living today with the consequences of that decision.”

The Brussels conference aims to drum up billions of dollars in aid for Syria. The UN relief coordinator, Stephen O’Brien, said the figure required “for the immediate needs of 2017” was about $8bn. He also called for the perpetrators of Tuesday’s “morally abhorrent” act to be held accountable, following an international investigation by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. “It is from those facts that we will need to make sure there is a proper holding of accountability,” O’Brien told reporters in Brussels.
The EU foreign policy chief, Federica Mogherini, said she hoped “millions, billions of euros” would be pledged to help Syrians in their country and across the Middle East. She said she hoped the event would give a push to peace talks in Geneva.
Though the EU has attempted to carve a bigger role for itself in resolving the conflict, it remains a lesser player, a fact underscored by the absence of senior representatives from Russia, Turkey or the US at the Brussels event.
The EU hopes to use its aid budget as leverage but talk of reconstruction has been overshadowed by the attack. Mogherini said it was not too early to start post-conflict planning, adding: “I know it sounds surreal, especially today, but if you want peace, you have to start building the conditions for peace.”
Associated Press contributed to this report