The movement's momentum has sputtered and leaders of different protest groups are split over what action to take.
Hong Kong’s former deputy leader Rafael Hui and property tycoon Thomas Kwok have been jailed after being convicted of corruption.
The ring – nicknamed Deep Panda by Alperovitch – has sent text messages that appear to be from friends but contain malware. When a message is opened, spyware is installed on the phone.
Juan Ignacio Zoido, the Spanish interior minister, defended the Supreme Court decision and also expressed confidence that the Belgian judiciary would eventually hand over Mr. Puigdemont.
8. What kind of vehicle is the U.S. Navy's P-8 Poseidon, which is being used to hunt for the missing Malaysia Airlines passenger plane?
The deposed Catalan president, Carles Puigdemont, is in Brussels to avoid facing the same fate as Junqueras: a possible jail term of up to 30 years.
MADRID — In his first visit to Catalonia since taking control of the restive region in Spain, Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy on Sunday urged Catalans to vote in next month’s elections to defeat the independence movement and return the region to “normality.”
Mr. Rajoy then called new elections for the regional Parliament, hoping to reshuffle the political deck and calculating that Catalan voters would punish the secessionist leaders. Many are now being prosecuted for sedition and rebellion and campaigned from prison or exile.
Q&A Why does the Spanish government say the Catalan referendum is illegal? Show Hide The Spanish government argues that any referendum on Catalan independence would be illegal because the country’s 1978 constitution makes no provision for a vote on self-determination. The Spanish constitutional court, which has suspended the referendum law pushed through the Catalan parliament in September, is looking into whether the law breaches the constitution. In March this year, the former Catalan president Artur Mas was banned from holding public office for two years after being found guilty of disobeying the constitutional court by holding a symbolic independence referendum three years ago.
Photo
