.@heliheartland wearing the pin signals my intentions to intervene and report - I can only hope others will do the same. #safetypin — miss pommery 1926 (@cheeahs) June 28, 2016
Thornton said she had been "heartened by the people who have intervened to challenge abusive behavior, condemn it and reassure victims that those views are not representative of Britain."
More than 17 million British voters (52%) backed Brexit in last week's referendum on breaking away from the EU.
"From the beginning, I've always said if you're going to wear the safety pin, you've got to back it up. So if you put it on, you are pledging to support people and to intervene and report if you see incidences of racial or xenophobic abuse."
"I think those people really lack a sense of empathy for what it must be like to walk into a room or step on a train -- full of strangers -- and you just have to hope that none of them are going to come after you," she says. "I completely agree. It is patronizing if you just wear the pin and think you've done your job."
Explaining the symbolism behind her idea, 30-year-old Allison tells CNN: "There's a woman in a hijab, she gets on the bus and there's an empty seat. She sees that there is a person wearing a safety pin sitting next to it (and) she just knows that she can sit there and they will not hassle her.
The idea was sparked by Twitter user Allison ( @cheeahs ), who wanted a simple way of showing those worried about possible attacks "my intentions to intervene and report" on their behalf.
A string of racially motivated crimes have been reported in post-Brexit Britain. And as police begin investigations into allegations of hate crimes against the foreign-born population around the UK, Twitter user Allison (who goes by the handle @cheeahs ) suggested the simple sign of solidarity.
"Like the vast, vast majority of people, I have been shocked and disgusted at some the cases of racial or anti-immigrant abuse that have been reported this week," she wrote in a blog on the NPCC's website
"But this is just a quiet way to show, 'Hey it's fine, I'm with you.'"
