"They wont have any legal authority, so they will be equal to a group of rebels trying to impose their own arbitrariness on the people of Catalonia," he said.
In response, Carles Puigdemont, the leader of Catalonia, told Catalan television that no politician or court in Madrid could stop the referendum.
A separate case against six other Catalan lawmakers related to the independence bid was adjourned at the Supreme Court. All six, including Parliament speaker Carme Forcadell, showed up to the session.
Indeed, the forcible steps by the central government have now left Catalan civil servants and politicians with the painful choice of sticking to their secessionist plans and defying Madrid’s direct administration or facing the potential of criminal charges.
Spain’s suspension of Catalonia’s home rule was immediate and implacable, and went far beyond what is established in the Spanish constitution. At a cabinet meeting on the evening of 27 October, Rajoy’s government approved the immediate removal of the Catalan government from office – which represented the absolute majority in Catalonia’s regional parliament – substituting it with direct rule by Spain’s Popular party government, despite the fact that this party holds just 8% of the seats in Catalonia’s regional parliament.
To no surprise, Aksyonov reported that more than 80% of people in Crimea voted in the referendum and 96% voted for Crimea to join Russia. 
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Others, like Ester Gonzales, who was born and raised in Llivia, saw the Catalan leader’s approach as “a necessary step toward independence.”
Miroshnichenko is a member of the new parliamentary committee on freedom of speech. He said afterwards he did not believe he had done anything wrong but was prepared to be investigated. He added Panteleymonov had "served Putin and Russian propaganda … at a time when Ukrainians were dying on the streets".
President Donald Trump appears on the verge of unraveling one of Europe's smugger foreign policy successes: the nuclear deal with Iran , or Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
