Soon after he was elected as a student union leader, Lester Shum found an unnerving warning in his email inbox: “We believe state-sponsored attackers may be attempting to compromise your account or computer,” the message read.
His phone calls have become filled with echoes and garbled talk. Some of his friends in Cantonese-speaking Hong Kong were convinced that the mainland was listening. “There are voices,” Shum said, “of people who are speaking Mandarin.”
Many activists in the region have long assumed that Beijing keeps tabs on them. But the members of a new generation – who have grown up sharing every hope and feeling via the internet – are realising that they may be monitored. And they are coming under increased scrutiny both online and on the streets of the city, because of the Umbrella Movement.
After police cleared most of Hong Kong’s pro-democracy protesters on Thursday, after more than two months of occupation, their thoughts are turning to what lies ahead. Realising that their involvement may have made them likely targets, some young demonstrators are growing nervous about their future.
Some students fret that they, like some peers of late, may be barred from travelling to the mainland. If such restrictions persist, their job prospects could be greatly harmed.
Security experts have little doubt that authorities are spying on democracy activists.
“If you’re using a cellphone or landline in Hong Kong and you’re one of the protesters, you should absolutely expect that your phone calls are being listened to by the Chinese authorities,” said Dmitri Alperovitch, co-founder of CrowdStrike – a US-based cybersecurity company. “I would advise them to be paranoid.”
For the past two months, Hong Kong police have routinely trained cameras on demonstrators and crowds gathering on pavements near occupation sites.
“They want to find every single protester after all this is finished,” Angus Chan, a 23-year-old financial consultant who wore a camouflage-printed bandana over his nose and mouth, said. As he spoke he was staring at an officer aiming a camera in his direction in Mong Kok, near what had been a large protest camp. “This is why I’m wearing a mask.”
The city’s police force says it has filmed public events since 2006. An email from its public relations branch said: “It is reasonable and lawful for police to take evidence by video-filming those who are suspected to have violated the law.”
However, wearing a surgical mask in public doesn’t protect your identity if you’re tweeting your hate for the regime.
“They still have some idea that because they are students, the communist party won’t do something serious to them,” said Alvin Cheng, a 27-year-old protester who attends an Australian university.
“I think some of the students are not well prepared to fight against the communist party.”
Hong Kong enjoys far greater freedoms than the mainland, where activists, rights lawyers and dissidents are routinely rounded up for questioning and detention. A growing number have been jailed in recent months.
Human rights lawyers and longtime activists in Hong Kong say they have long presumed that the government has been tracking them, especially by tapping their phones.
“I’m pretty sure mine’s been monitored, despite my phone [being] covered by professional privilege,” said solicitor Michael Vidler, who is representing several of the arrested democracy protesters in Hong Kong.
Within one hour of securing the release of teen protester Joshua Wong after the youth’s arrest in September, Vidler said he lost all of his WhatsApp messages – something that’s never happened before or since.
Question for protesters include whether monitoring is being done by the Hong Kong government, the extent of Beijing’s part, and how much information they share.
Alperovitch said his company had found at least one spy ring with ties to the Chinese government that had infiltrated the computer networks of democracy protesters and the pro-democracy Civic Party.
The ring – nicknamed Deep Panda by Alperovitch – has sent text messages that appear to be from friends but contain malware. When a message is opened, spyware is installed on the phone.
“It could grab their contact list, eavesdrop on their phones and steal emails, all covertly,” Alperovitch said.
Several pro-democracy supporters have had personal emails and files leaked to media. Jimmy Lai, founder of Next Media, a publishing company that has given generous contributions to democracy groups, has been a frequent target.
Beijing says it opposes hacking and is the largest victim of such attacks.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman responded to earlier claims of hacking by Deep Panda from CrowdStrike by saying: “Some US internet security firms turn a blind eye to the threat posed by the US to other countries through the internet and are bent on stirring things up by constantly talking about ‘China Internet Threat’. The so-called evidence they produce is untenable and not worth commenting on.”
Whoever is behind the online attacks, activists fear there could be real and immediate consequences for their protest actions.
Since 7 November, the mainland’s border patrol has denied entry to at least nine Hong Kong residents with no criminal records, including student leaders who wanted to press their case for democratic elections, lawmaker Cyd Ho said at a public hearing on 3 December. Authorities have cited student activities that violated national security or affected national diplomacy, as well as “contravention of the relevant rules”, she said.
At the hearing, Hong Kong’s secretary for security, Lai Tung-kwok, denied that the government had been compiling blacklists of social activists and passing those to mainland authorities. The bureau declined to answer a reporter’s questions.
Some students who are not in the limelight have been turned away at the border. Jane Leung, a City University student protester, said she was denied entry three weeks ago to videotape a wedding.
“If I can’t go back to China, it will be a problem for my career,” said Leung, who hopes to become a film director.
She said she doesn’t know how long that prohibition will last. “If the job needs me to go to China, I will hesitate, because I don’t know when I’ll be banned.”
Some adult activists in Hong Kong say they have no doubt that the youth will be marked, and punished, with severe consequences.
“It’s a bit like Taiwan and South Korea in 60s and 70s,” said Joseph Cheng, a Hong Kong political science professor and convener of Alliance for True Democracy.
“You are blacklisted. You can’t join the government. You can’t join big business and your career will be limited. Because very few people are willing to employ someone who is blacklisted by the Chinese authorities … you become a liability to the company.”
Protesters worry not just about government and career pressure, but about the possibility of their activities affecting harming their relatives.
Alvin Cheng’s brother is an electronics engineer in Hong Kong who frequently travels to the mainland.
“His boss will ask him if he’s involved with the protest,” Cheng said, his eyes darting around the main camp.
The authorities, may not take action against those on the streets, he said, “but [against] your family, and they will give you pressure.”
Shum, who became an officer of the Chinese University of Hong Kong’s student union in 2013, and deputy secretary general of the Hong Kong Federation of Students this spring, says he won’t fret about the prospect of being blacklisted.
Arrested three times since July for democracy demonstrations, he said he had little idea what it will mean for his future.
But of one thing he is certain. “The government won’t hire me,” he said with a laugh.