This year, there has been a rash of strikes in the Chinese export industry – headlined by the strike of 30,000 shoe workers at Yue Yuen Industrial Holdings, in Dongguan, southern China. Two factors make conditions ripe. There is a labour shortage, with better jobs available in the service sector. At the same time, a slowing economy is forcing managers to try to claw back certain perks and benefits; at Yue Yuen, it was the underpayment of contributions to a retirement fund that sparked the trouble.
The confrontation with Beijing has moved the territory to the front lines of the battle for democratic rights in China since a government clampdown silenced much dissent on the mainland. Since Hong Kong was returned by Britain to Chinese rule in 1997, it has enjoyed considerable legal autonomy under the “one country, two systems” formula, in which Hong Kong residents retained rights not available elsewhere in China.
Though the strike was settled, its significance has not been lost on China’s government. In an industrial landscape that often looks more like the 19th than the 21st century, the internet is rapidly changing workplace dynamics.
It’s hard to imagine, if you’ve not been inside the regimented and stressful atmosphere of a Chinese factory, what an internet cafe first felt like to someone who has only ever slept on a farm or in a factory dorm. “Our foreman is a tough guy. But when I meet him in the internet cafe I am not afraid of him,” one female worker told researchers in 2012. “He has no right to control me here. He is an internet user. So am I.”
Now, on top of technology and a changed economic situation, there is the example of Occupy Central. This peaceful mass movement for democracy in Chinese-administered Hong Kong has brought hundreds of thousands to the streets, mobilised different sections of society, and used the same tools – internet, social media and occupied space – as the horizontal movements in Europe and the US. “China is different”, the perennial excuse of Sinologists for the population’s failure to rebel against Communist party rule, looks hollow since Occupy Central began.
It is not clear how much people inside mainland China know about Occupy Central. But at Sun Yat-sen University in Guangdong last year, students organised a mild, mainly cultural response to it – printing T-shirts with the slogan “Not only birds are free” and launching discussions around related issues. The students involved included some who had previously been factory workers – and who were now involved in advocacy work for factory workers in mainland China.
In the 1990s, when the Chinese government was still dealing with the remnants of an old, industrial, relatively privileged working class, concentrated in heavy industries, worker unrest was treated as tantamount to treason. The initial years of rapid expansion brought chaos and brutality. But before long, official Chinese unions began to organise the migrant workforce, and workers were given basic legal rights. This “normalisation” of labour relations is not threatened by the outbreak of strikes this year. But information technology injects a new dynamic.
If this was only about factory workers versus corrupt bosses, the implications would be interesting but not dramatic. But if you accept that the main faultline in the world is between networks and hierarchies, then China is sitting right on top of it. And China’s workers – who look like digital rebels, but analogue slaves – are right at the heart of the phenomenon.
The previous week had seen days of action, as university and high school students came out in droves to rally against what they believe is the Chinese central government's reneging on key promises for Hong Kong's political future. 
The main question burning in the minds of most Hong Kongers is how this will all end – and almost everyone involved can surmise a worst-case scenario. Hong Kong’s former security chief Regina Ip said on Monday that the city government fears a “mini-Tiananmen” – presumably that the protests would be violently dispersed, perhaps by the Chinese military. Nobody wants to see a repeat of 4 June 1989, when Beijing dispatched the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) to open fire on peaceful pro-democracy protesters. The PLA maintains a garrison in Hong Kong, but Leung said in a televised address on Monday morning that the Hong Kong government would not call in the troops. Chinese state media has also emphasised the central government’s confidence in Hong Kong authorities to deal with the protests themselves. That said, the protests continue to escalate, and Beijing seems ready to stand its ground, no matter what the cost.
Chen was posted to the city in 1994 as a member of the preparatory committee for the formation of Hong Kong as a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China. He was China's point-person in the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG), in charge of negotiating with British side over the 1997 handover of power. He now heads the Chinese Association of Hong Kong and Macao Studies, a think-tank based in Beijing.
"For (Xi) to make a compromise on Hong Kong would be a tremendous loss of face," Lam said.
"Beijing would ... lose face if they were to sack Leung in the near future," says Lam at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
The protests will never spill over into the rest of China … For the minority of people who want to foment a ‘colour revolution’ on the mainland by way of Hong Kong, this is but a daydream,” it said.
“Hong Kong has been acting as a reference point for China — whatever they want to do, they come to Hong Kong to take a look first, and if it is good they pick it up,” said Li Kui-Wai, an associate professor of economics and finance at the City University of Hong Kong. “In a sense, they are trying to catch up with us.”
But unlike a significant portion of Tibetans and Uighurs, Hong Kongers generally do not seek independence from China. Even Jimmy Lai, the pro-democracy media tycoon who is a strident critic of the Communist Party, said Hong Kong “can never be divided from China.”
Protest leaders said they had not received any funding from the United States government or nonprofit groups affiliated with it. Chinese officials choose to blame hidden foreign forces, they argued, in part because they find it difficult to accept that so many ordinary people in Hong Kong want democracy.
Also on Wednesday, Hong Kong’s most prominent tycoon, Li Ka-shing, broke his silence over the protests to urge the demonstrators to go home. Li, Asia’s richest man, said that if Hong Kong’s rule of law broke down it would be the city’s “greatest sorrow”.
While FireChat became the app of choice in Hong Kong's -- and saw similar success in protests earlier this year in Taiwan -- Daligault said the app was never designed as a messaging tool for protesters.
Spurred on by police attempts to reopen part of the district to traffic, the protesters' numbers increased overnight, swelling to around 9,000, according to Hong Kong police. 
The scheduled dialogue — the first formal meeting between the two groups — will take place on Tuesday at the Hong Kong Academy of Medicine, and will last two hours, Lam said in a statement. Five officials will take part, and five student representatives. It will be broadcast live. “I am very much looking forward to having this dialogue with the student representatives,” she said.
During that weekend, police in Hong Kong arrested about 70 student protesters, including several of its young leaders, in the mass call for democracy. 
“Regardless of how official the bans might be, they can always achieve the same result by scaring off people or companies who might otherwise want to approach us,” said Ms. Ho, who was camping out this week beneath an overpass near Hong Kong’s government headquarters amid a sea of colorful tents.
The Chinese never made good on their threat to invade, in part because they hoped the “one country, two systems” model they eventually adopted for Hong Kong would encourage peaceful reunification with Taiwan, the self-governed island that China claims as its own. China’s leaders also had no interest in disrupting Hong Kong’s wildly successful economy, a vital outlet for foreign trade and hard currency at a time when China was largely isolated from the industrialized world.
Every time Alice Lau visits Hong Kong’s pro-democracy protests, she wears two photo ID badges, slung around her neck in a clear plastic sheath.
My generation’s political awakening has been simmering for years. Nearly five years ago, young people led protests against the wasteful construction of a new rail line connecting Hong Kong to mainland China. In 2011, many young people, myself included, organized to oppose a national education program of Chinese propaganda that Beijing tried to force on us. I was 14 at the time, and all I could think was that the leaders in Beijing have no right to brainwash us with their warped view of the world.
"The leaders in Beijing are afraid that if they give democracy to Hong Kong, then other parts of China, like Xinjiang and Tibet, will also ask for it," said a 17-year old female high school student who lives in Taipei. 
He said he believed China’s moves were in breach of Hong Kong’s mini-constitution, the Basic Law.
"We can use different media to express ourselves... to tell people what we feel about Hong Kong," Lau said. "I like the peaceful and silent protest and I'm supporting the students behind the scenes."
“The idea is to make 10 of these, one on each lamppost, lining the street all the way past the P.L.A. building to Central,” he said, referring to the People’s Liberation Army headquarters and Hong Kong’s business district. Mr. Wong, who flew back from Europe when he heard the protests were starting, was getting a helping hand with his installation from a group of working-class men.
Other news articles, social media posts, and images of Hong Kong's protests have been heavily censored in China: as the first images of the occupation went viral, even Instagram became inaccessible.
It was supposed to be a routine trip for cheap material from China. Instead she spent more than an hour being searched and interrogated by border guards, and was ultimately put on a bus back to Hong Kong. She was told she was a threat to national security. The reason: she had been videotaped at a protest months ago in Hong Kong.
A growing number of people in Hong Kong who have taken part in the city’s recent pro-democracy protests aresuddenly finding themselves denied entry into China. The action hasshocked many and sparked widespread belief that Chinese authorities have assembled a blacklist with hundreds, perhaps thousands, of names in recent months.
In a well-publicised incident recently, three leaders of the ongoing student protest were stopped while trying to fly to Beijing to confront Chinese leaders. Their case– staged in part as a form of protest – drew international headlines, but subsequent cases have been more surprising because they involve relative unknowns– not leaders – whomerely participated in protests among hundreds of thousands of others.
For some, the denials threaten their livelihoods because of how intertwined Hong Kong’s economy is with mainland China’s. They may also cast a chilling pall on freedom of expression and havealready fuelled paranoia among protesters, fearful of future consequences from being on China’s watch lists.
The 23-year-old design student who was stopped last week, for example, asked to speak anonymously for fear of further retaliations by Chinese authorities. Since her hassle at the border, she has avoided saying anything personal or sensitive over the phone in case it is being tapped.Before speaking with a foreign reporter, she checked his press card and compared his face with online pictures searched on a smartphone. “Everything we watch on the news about mainland China – the paranoia, human rights abuses, the way the Communist party treats its citizens – for the first time in my life, I feel that way about Hong Kong,” she said.
Another promise was suffrage, and at the heart of the current movement – called the Umbrella Revolution or Occupy Central – is the demand that Hong Kong residents be allowed to choose Hong Kong’s leaders themselves, instead of having candidates pre-vetted by Beijing.
According to the Chinese government, Hong Kong residents made 154m trips to the mainland in 2013 alone, up 3.4% from the year before.
Among those who have reported being turned away at the border are a member of the student union at Hong Kong Baptist University, a Lingnan University studentwho was trying to buy books in the Chinese city of Shenzhen and a City University student trying to visit relatives. Eric Tang, 21, a student at Open University of Hong Kong, said he was turned away this month while trying to shop with his girlfriend in Shenzhen.
Over the course of two hours, he said, guards took his Hong Kong ID cards and searched his body and bag. Then they turned on his laptop and rifled through that.
He said he was surprised because he is not a famous figure like the Hong Kong democracy activists and legislators denied entry in the past. He is a Democratic party member, which may have got him tagged, but he suspects his denial was triggered by a 1 July protest he attended – a summer precursor to the current occupying movement that continues to paralyse parts of downtown Hong Kong.
For theyoung design student, who was also arrested at the 1 July protest and released on 2 July,not having access to China may mean buying costlier, inferior design materials in Hong Kong and perhaps a lower grade in her classes. She remains deeply rattled from her interrogation by border guards. But if she had to do it all over again, she would have attended the protests just the same, she said. “I have nothing to be ashamed of. I have no regrets about what I did.”
When the former British colony was returned to China in 1997, Beijing promised that its residents would continue to enjoy freedoms unseen in the mainland. People in Hong Kong holdlarge annual rallies on the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square crackdown and freely discuss China’s political system on social media like Facebook and Twitter.
“This new trend of denying entry is a powerful weapon, not just against students but against professionals who want to support the movement,” said Willy Lam, a political analyst at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. “Everyone these days needs access to China. It doesn’t matter if you’re an accountant, architect or anything else, that’s where the market is.”
Tang said he had no problems traveling to China throughout October to visit his sick grandfather. But now, his relatives, already nervous about his democracy advocacy, are worried his troubles will affect their freedom to travel to China. Tang said he worries, too, whether his trouble could have an impact on friends and classmates.
This article appeared in Guardian Weekly, which incorporates material from the Washington Post