British expats could forfeit their rights to live in Spain if they vote to leave the EU, the Spanish prime minister has warned, saying forgoing free movement rights would be “negative for everyone”.
The so-called special relationship with the United States isn’t providing much comfort to the Brexit side these days; President Obama’s recent admonition to vote no in the referendum enraged many people who believe America should stay out of it and let their country think for itself.
“I have no doubt whatsoever, as I have repeatedly stated, that it would be very negative if the United Kingdom left the European Union. Negative for everybody, for the United Kingdom, for Spain, and for the European Union,” Rajoy told Spanish news agency EFE.
“But, above all, it would be very negative for British citizens: the European Union is based, ever since its foundation, on the principles of freedom of movement of people, goods, services and capitals.”
EU referendum live: Cameron and Corbyn make case for Remain – separately Read more
“If the United Kingdom left the European Union, it would be very negative for everyone and from every perspective.”
British expats in Spain, many of them retired, have expressed concern about access to healthcare after a potential leave vote. UK citizens are entitled to healthcare via the European health insurance card or free health insurance from the Spanish government under EU law, but Spain would not be obliged to continue to offer free healthcare to non-EU citizens.
Rajoy’s comments came after the Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, warned that a pledge by Brexit campaigners’ to enact a points-based immigration system would mean British citizens would face similar barriers to travel and work in Europe.
“It would be unavoidable, inevitable, for us and I think for many of us in Europe to follow the same proposals to implement a points system also in the rest of the European Union,” he told BBC News.
Leave campaigners have argued that new rights for British citizens to live and work in other EU countries could be negotiated after Brexit.
Free movement and its effects on migration to the UK is one of the key issues for voters, according to new polling conducted by Vote Leave, which found almost half of those surveyed said levels of migration from the other 27 EU countries had been bad for the UK, against 26% who thought it had benefited Britain.If you want to have your say on the future of Britain’s role in the EU, you need to be on the electoral register, which means registering to vote. You must make sure you register in the place where you intend to vote – usually using your permanent home address.
The EU remains the most important market for UK goods, so it is possible that any competitive gains from a cheaper pound would be negated by trade barriers in the event of a vote to leave. Much would depend on the size of the depreciation in the pound, whether the depreciation was sustained, and the deal struck with Britain’s former EU partners about access to the single market.
• With the polls indicating that the possibility of a vote to leave the EU is looming larger, it is natural that thoughts should turn to the issue of how we would cope with the changes that would ensue. The post-Brexit changes to laws, government spending, taxes, prices, jobs, etc would be significant and would affect everyone in the UK, many of them for the worse. I believe therefore that we would need a coalition government for a few years during the Brexit process until things have settled down. This coalition should include all the major UK political parties. It would be quite wrong if the important decisions about post-Brexit changes are made by one political group, especially the relatively rightwing faction who are driving the leave campaign.
Facing declining circulation and ruthless digital competition, the nation’s newspaper industry has ceded some of the power it once held to shape public opinion. But the hostility of some papers to the European Union is nonetheless a problem for Prime Minister David Cameron, who is engaged in a ferocious struggle to persuade Britons to vote to remain in the bloc.
Vote Leave, the official out campaign, responded to leaks of the plans by accusing the chancellor of breaking seven key Tory pledges on which they were elected last year, and set out a competing vision of a post-Brexit world in which Britain would claw back money from the EU. The campaign group said that parliament would react to an out vote by bringing in legislation to cut VAT on fuel, boost NHS funding and bring in a points-based system for immigration.
The surge of fear lately stems from the so-called Brexit vote. Recent polls are showing that support in Britain for leaving the European Union is on the rise: More voters are backing a departure from the bloc than are opting to stay. If Britain drops out, the future of the European Union could be in doubt, and financial markets would be in for a rough ride.
In the near term, the main risk to Britain’s economy was next week’s referendum, the fund’s directors said. “While recognising that this choice is for UK voters to make and that their decisions will reflect both economic and non-economic factors, directors agreed that the net economic effects of leaving the EU would likely be negative and substantial,” they said in a press release accompanying the report.
The Bank of England, the Institute for Fiscal Studies and the IMF have assessed the long-term economic consequences of Brexit. They suggest an income loss of £3,000 to £5,000 annually per household – once the British economy settles down to its new steady-state five years or so after Brexit. But there are some more immediate financial consequences that have hardly been mentioned in the referendum debate.
According to the British Election Study, the overall vote is pretty evenly split between Brexit and remain, but two thirds of Britain’s minority ethnic voters favour staying in the EU. At first glance that might not appear too surprising, but in a debate that has focused heavily on immigration, what is it that has made a third of minority voters – many of them the descendants of immigrants themselves – lean towards leaving?
Jeremy Cook, chief economist at currency broker WorldFirst, watched sterling plummet throughout the early hours of Friday. He said: “Sterling is in freefall at the moment. It looks like its goose is cooked.” At one point, Cook shouted across the trading room: “It’s fallen into the 30s,”, as the likelihood of a leave vote increased and the pound fell below $1.40.
Although most of Ukraine's business elite have strong ties with Moscow, if the east of the country were to fall under the influence of the Kremlin then Ukraine's billionaires would quickly be overrun by their wealthier and better connected Russian counterparts. "The Ukrainian oligarchs have no political influence over Putin," says Leshchenko. "If the east were to secede, their businesses would be snatched. They would become the small businessmen of a Russian province".
(CNN) Scotland will likely seek independence for a second time this decade after the historic vote for the United Kingdom to leave the European Union, Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said Friday.
One property developer in central London, which had offered a “Brexit clause” allowing nervous buyers to pull out of deals in the event of a leave vote said it was allowing buyers to withdraw and keep their deposits. David Humbles, managing director of the luxury Two Fifty One development, said: “We can confirm that a few purchasers have decided not to proceed given the uncertainty of the market. However, the majority are continuing with their purchase and the marketing strategy to offer the pledge at the launch was a worthwhile exercise.”
“The main impact will be massive disorder in the E.U. system for the next two years,” said Thierry de Montbrial, founder and executive chairman of the French Institute of International Relations. “There will be huge political transition costs, on how to solve the British exit, and the risk of a domino effect or bank run from other countries that think of leaving.”
Britain’s vote to leave the European Union poses difficult questions for investment firms like Greylock, which made big bets on Greece as it teetered on the brink of economic collapse. At a time when many European countries are dealing with flagging economies, Mr. Humes said he was concerned that the Brexit vote would feed a growing populist surge across the Continent, threatening to chip away at the foundation of the European Union.
Over the past decade the party appears to have mellowed, eschewing xenophobia, academic commentators suggest. On Monday, the US ambassador in Kiev, Geoffrey Pyatt, said he had been "positively impressed" by Svoboda's evolution in opposition and by its behaviour in the Rada, Ukraine's parliament. "They have demonstrated their democratic bona fides," the ambassador asserted. Svoboda played a leading role in the revolution; 18 of its members were shot dead. Another deputy prime minister in the new government, meanwhile, is Jewish.
Hammond, the foreign secretary, has said the new prime minister will need to think about the democratic legitimacy of the terms of Brexit. At one point even Johnson, and Dominic Cummings, the director of the Vote Leave campaign, made the case for a second referendum on the terms of a Brexit.
Despite fronting the campaign to leave the EU and being “most trusted” by voters on the issues, the former London mayor Boris Johnson was judged by intimate insiders not to be up to the task of negotiating complex Brexit agreements, his heart not really in it either. It is an open secret that Johnson hesitated before deciding which side to back, and had expected the one he finally chose to lose the referendum. That would have eased his path to the eventual succession as a plucky loser. Instead he looked shattered when it turned out he wasn’t.
Just 48 hours ago, Boris Johnson was expected to win easily. Few who knew the clever, lazy, disorganised loner with shambolic box office appeal – known always as Boris, never Johnson – well think his removal is anything but good news for the serious pursuit of national goals in tough times. The result will be less fun, but may better suit a serious public mood.
His own paternal great-grandfather, a Turkish politician called Ali Kemal, was beaten to death for being on the wrong side in the turmoil of the Ottoman Empire’s breakup after 1918. The thought may weigh heavily on him – as it should other populists seeking the path ahead in our dangerous times.
Britain was deeply Eurosceptic. Positive facts and arguments in favour of EU membership were mostly disbelieved and rejected out of hand; and most voters believed that the costs of being in the EU were far greater than the benefits, and that other EU countries got much more out of membership than we did. Beyond that, there was a widely held feeling that the only way to cope with the pressures on jobs, public services and the economy may be to put up barriers to the world – and therefore to the EU – which we alone controlled; a craving for unilateral control in a multilateral world.
The research that informs political campaigns is much more sophisticated than published polls. We don’t just want to know who is going to vote one way or the other. We need to understand what perceptions and arguments cause people to come to the voting conclusion that they do. This means looking beyond demographic and regional factors to map the electorate on the basis of attitudes and behaviour. We need to identify our core vote – and our opponent’s – and to define, with as much nuance as possible, the voters who are genuinely in play: what they think and feel about the choice before them and which messages, messengers and modes are the most effective in persuading them.
The foundational research showed Britain divided into three almost equal chunks. The first chunk – 34% of the population – was internationalist in outlook; socially liberal; positive about globalisation, immigration and multiculturalism; and optimistic about the future. For these voters, the economy was by far the most important issue in the referendum. They were overwhelmingly going to vote remain, regardless of the terms of the debate.
The second chunk – at that stage, 32% of the population – was diametrically opposed: nationalist in outlook; socially conservative; fearful of globalisation; opposed to multiculturalism; preoccupied by immigration; pessimistic about the future; and very hostile to the EU. For these voters, immigration was far and away the most important issue in the referendum; most of them favoured ending free movement, even if this made Britain worse off. The attitude that most characterised them was “I hardly recognise the country I live in any more”. More than half of them agreed with the statement “If I could wave a magic wand and take the UK back to the 1950s, I would”. Their imperative was to shut out the consequences of globalisation and open markets. These voters were overwhelmingly going to vote leave, regardless of the arguments.
There was no emotional argument for the EU that had any resonance with these voters. For committed remain and leave voters, the decision was often passionately held and part of a wider worldview. For the “hearts v heads” voters it was a pragmatic, often transactional, decision. Like almost everyone else, they were worried about immigration – but the economic implications of Brexit mattered even more. Our challenge was to cut through with hard economic arguments – so that head would trump heart. This is where the campaign failed and the referendum was lost.
In April 2015, when the nascent remain team first looked in detail at the spectrum of attitudes, the “hearts v heads” voters on balance – and mostly with reluctance – came down in favour of remaining in the EU by 55% to 45%. On 23 June 2016 they voted in favour of leaving the EU by about the same margin. Heart won out over head.
The detailed analysis of the result suggests that the dividing lines of politics are shifting: as Tony Blair put it, left v right is being supplanted as the driver of political alignment by open v closed – and Britain is split on those lines more or less 50/50. The referendum was decided by people who voted on the basis of national identity and in defiance of rational economic self-interest. The result made clear the existential threat that this poses to the Labour party now – and in the foreseeable future, unless it can square the circle, to the Conservative party too.Scottish voters are reconsidering their opposition to independence after the Brexit vote, the SNP’s business convener, Derek Mackay, has said, despite a poll that found a majority still favoured being part of the UK outside the EU.
At 62%, almost two-thirds of Scots who took part in last month’s referendum on EU membership voted to remain, prompting the SNP’s leader and Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, to say that the leave result made another vote on Scottish independence highly likely.
The percentage who said they would not vote or did not know increased from 12% to 14% after the Brexit vote, the poll found.
“However, a lot could still change on this front in the coming years. Article 50 has not yet been triggered and once details of the Brexit deal emerge it may alter the context of the independence debate.”
“The prime minister has been very clear that we are going to make a success of Brexit, and the focus now needs to be on collaborative working with the Scottish government as ‘Team UK’ to ensure the best possible deal for Scotland and the rest of the UK.”
Within the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign, the referendum often felt like a battle between a simple lie and a complex truth. The leave campaign seemed to have all the best tunes. “Take back control” was a strong, clear message requiring no explanation. It was demonstrably not true that leaving the EU would give the UK £350m a week to spend on other things like the NHS, but endless repetition of that single number meant people heard it and it struck a chord.
“In light of the overwhelming vote to remain in the EU, it is right that the Scottish government explores every option to protect our relationship with and place in the EU, including the option of another independence referendum if that is what it takes.
The research to map out the campaign to keep Britain in the European Union started more than a year before the referendum. The story it told was more daunting than the voting polls implied. Within the data, it was clear that the axis of British politics was in rotation: a new battle line was emerging, cutting directly across the heartland of both main parties – a division founded in national identity and compounded by the impact of an open, globalised economy.
The arithmetic told us that motivating and mobilising pro-EU voters would be nowhere near enough; we would also need the votes of people whose underlying attitudes meant they would find the leave campaign’s arguments compelling and would be hard to persuade.
The third chunk – 34% of the population – was conflicted. These people were the in-play voters: the primary target for both campaigns in the EU referendum. They were very clear that they didn’t like the EU, and why: uncontrolled immigration, the huge direct cost of membership, too much meddling in our laws and lives. They were torn between the appealing idea of insulating the UK from the pressures of an open world, and fear of the idea of a Britain outside the EU, isolated and alone. They were defined by the attitude that “my heart wants to leave the EU, but my head says it may be too risky”.
On immigration we had no satisfactory answer. For voters who felt this was the most important issue, nothing came close to the simple appeal of ending free movement from the EU, and that was plainly irreconcilable with remaining a member. The Stronger in Europe campaign tested dozens of arguments, but none had any traction with the key in-play voters. Because of the hearts v heads dynamic, many wanted to believe the leave arguments, and disbelieve those forwarded by remain.
One of the few straightforward ways to try to get across the risks of leaving the EU was to point out the overwhelming weight of opinion among economists, businesses, unions – the reviled “experts”. Research established that “independent experts” were top of the list of people whose opinions the swing voters wanted to hear. It turned out that what they really meant was “independent experts who agree with me”. A poll during the campaign found that while remain voters trusted a wide range of experts and professionals, leave voters didn’t trust anyone.
Fifty-five percent of Scottish voters opted to remain in the UK less than two years ago, with 45% supporting independence, but the SNP has since received a huge boost in support, winning all but three Scottish seats in Westminster at last year’s general election.
YouGov polled 1,006 adults between 20 and 25 July, roughly a month after the referendum, and concluded that a guarantee of an independent Scotland being able to remain in the EU did not move public opinion.
There is a way Brexiters could really hand back control to voters | Caroline Lucas Read more
Labour’s traditional voters no longer share its progressive values | Matthew Goodwin Read more
Despite YouGov’s findings, the SNP’s business convener Derek Mackay says many voters in Scotland are reconsidering
“This poll is the latest to demonstrate that many no voters are reconsidering their opposition to independence now that Scotland faces being dragged out of the EU against our will,” Mackay said.
“While Scottish independence has been mooted in the wake of the vote to leave the EU, a new referendum is not currently on the table.
Saturday’s findings follow another recent poll which found almost a third of voters wanted to wait until the UK’s deal with the EU was clear before deciding whether to hold another independence referendum.YouGov’s Matthew Smith said: “One month after the UK’s shock decision to leave the EU, the latest YouGov research in Scotland shows no real shift towards independence.”
Boris read classics at Oxford and knows well the fate of demagogues in the ancient world who aroused the hopes and passions of the common man and woman, then failed to deliver.
