(CNN) Japan announced Friday that it will impose unilateral sanctions on eight foreign firms and individuals as punishment for their alleged dealings with North Korea.
Though the meeting is on the agenda, it's not clear what the Security Council can do to stop North Korea firing off missiles.
The sanctions are among the latest international efforts to isolate the country and follow sanctions imposed by the United Nations Security Council earlier this month.
North Korea drew a swift rebuke from the international community after successfully testing two intercontinental missiles in July, which experts say may eventually be able to deliver a nuclear warhead to the US mainland.
Japan's Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga said Friday, "it is extremely important to keep pressuring North Korea in coordination with US, South Korea and other countries."
Adding, "we would like to strongly urge North Korea to take concrete action towards denuclearization."
Tokyo has now sanctioned 72 organizations and 81 individuals for their dealings with North Korea.
JUST WATCHED US: Diplomacy remains key to N. Korea crisis Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH US: Diplomacy remains key to N. Korea crisis 00:54
These so-called "secondary sanctions," punishing those who do business with North Korea, come on the heels of similar measures levied by the US Treasury Department against Russian and Chinese entities for their dealings with North Korea on Wednesday
The United States has hoped to marshal a global coalition to isolate North Korea as part of its so-called "peaceful pressure" campaign. The hope is to put enough diplomatic and financial pressure on North Korea to bring it to the negotiating table.
Some illicit finance experts argue secondary sanctions are necessary in order to truly isolate North Korea and hinder its ability to bring in revenue.
North Korea uses the money for a host of purposes, from funding the lavish lifestyles of the country's elites to its weapons programs.
Accelerating missile program
The North Korean missile program in particular has been moving ahead at a rapid pace.
State media released propaganda photos Wednesday showing leader Kim Jong Un inspecting missiles in development that could be fired on shorter notice than some in its current arsenal.
When it comes to the progress of Pyongyang's nuclear program, US military commanders are already operating under the assumption that North Korea has the ability to miniaturize a nuclear warhead in order place it atop a missile -- an assessment that many independent nuclear scientists share.
But South Korea's intelligence service said last month it does not believe North Korea has perfected a stable re-entry system, which allows a warhead to survive the heat-intensive process of re-entering the Earth's atmosphere.
To pay for these programs, Pyongyang has skillfully evaded UN restrictions in order to earn cash, according to a recent report from the United Nations Panel of Experts on North Korea.
The panel found Pyongyang raised at least $270 million from commodities transactions since October last year, despite a ban on much of the trade under Security Council existing sanctions resolutions.
The report comes the same month the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed a new round of sanctions on North Korea in response to the testing of two ballistic missiles in July that experts say may be able to reach the United States.
"The United Nations Security Council just voted 15-0 to sanction North Korea. China and Russia voted with us. Very big financial impact!" US President Donald Trump tweeted after the vote.
JUST WATCHED What Trump has said about North Korea Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH What Trump has said about North Korea 02:05
Though China voted in favor of the UN sanctions, the country has long said it's opposed to unilateral measures to punish North Korea like the Japanese announced Friday.
"We have fulfilled and shouldered our international obligations, and our effort has been clear for all to see. If any Chinese companies or individuals are suspected of violating UN Security Council resolutions on North Korea, we will investigate and deal with them in accordance with our laws and regulations," Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said at a briefing Wednesday.
Accounting for nearly 90% of Pyongyang's imports, China is by far North Korea's most important benefactor. US Presidents dating back to the Bush administration have tried to get China to use its economic leverage to rein in its unruly neighbor.
North Korea's 2015 imports Source: Observatory of Economic Complexity
But some analysts say China has shown more of a propensity to crack down on illicit trade with North Korea recently.
Others worry economic pressure may not be enough, as North Korea sees the ability to successfully strike the Untied States with a nuclear weapon as the only viable way to prevent any American led attempts at regime change.
North Korea has long said unless the United States abandons its "hostile policy" toward Pyongyang, it will continue ahead with its nuclear program.
North Korea has said Tuesday's missile test was a prelude to a potential strike near the US territory of Guam.
“The Japanese government is adding to the anxiety over North Korean missiles, and that creates an atmosphere in which Korea-bashing is acceptable. North Korea is seen as the enemy and so, by extension, are people in Japan with North Korean roots.”
Park said that the two countries would "spare no efforts" to deter North Korea. But she also underlined the South's desire to tend to the dire needs of the North Korean people and to work toward Korean reunification.
Mr. Moon’s office said his government remained opposed to the reintroduction of American tactical nuclear weapons to South Korea, saying that doing so would make it more difficult to persuade North Korea to give up its own nuclear weapons."There are deep fractures in South Korea and a lot of ways that North Korea could manipulate that," he said.
His remarks came on the same day that the South Korean Defense Ministry said that the United States military planned to complete the deployment of an advanced missile-defense system in South Korea on Thursday.
The idea is a nonstarter. According to an opinion poll conducted in June and July, only 9 percent of Japanese respondents think Japan should acquire nuclear weapons. (About 67 percent of South Koreans polled said that South Korea should get such weapons.) The nuclearization of Japan — or South Korea — would undermine nonproliferation efforts, as well as validate North Korea’s nuclear brinkmanship to date.
It was the 15th missile test by North Korea this year and the first since North Korea detonated its most powerful nuclear bomb to date on Sept. 3.
Zhao said, in an effort to deter North Korea, Japan could provoke an arms race in East Asia with South Korea, China and even Russia.
We know what happened next: Several years after the heavy fuel oil was delivered and construction started on the light-water reactors, North Korea admitted to having a uranium enrichment program in violation of the agreement.
"I felt that what happened was going to happen," Trump told reporters in Aberdeen on Saturday.
“It could be the most powerful detonation of an H-bomb in the Pacific,” Ri, who is due to address the UN general assembly at the weekend, told reporters in New York. “We have no idea about what actions could be taken as it will be ordered by leader Kim Jong-un.”
