The uprising against Yanukovych started last November when he dropped plans to sign an association agreement with the EU, and instead announced a $15bn bailout from Moscow. Last week, Ukraine's new interim prime minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, signed the original agreement in Brussels. In theory, at least, this puts Ukraine on a path towards European integration.
In an interview Tuesday with PBS, acting Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said Ukraine is struggling to maintain a fighting capability after it was "deliberately dismantled" under Yanukovych. He said his government ceded Crimea without a shot to demonstrate to the world that Russia was the aggressor, he said. But if Moscow moves against another portion of Ukraine, "We will fight."
With bankruptcy looming and its currency enfeebled, Ukraine has received offers of help from the International Monetary Fund, the US and the EU. The new interim government says the country is on the brink of default, and accuses Yanukovych and his entourage of stealing $70bn.
Since last month pro-Russian protesters have regularly gathered in the city's Lenin Square. Their key demand is federalisation – greater autonomy for the east. Another is that the new government abandons its plan for European integration. "The EU doesn't want Ukraine. And we don't want the EU. We regard the signing of the association agreement as capitulation," an IT programmer, Roman Protsenko, said. Only friendly relations with "brotherly" Russia could bring prosperity, he argued, saying that Russia, Belarus and Ukraine shared history and orthodox religion.
Others said that two decades after Ukraine became independent, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, living standards had scarcely improved, with many surviving on pathetically low wages. Sergey – a 51-year-old anti-Maidan protester – said he was unemployed and that he and his wife, Irina, survived on her salary of $200 a month. "We've put up with these conditions for 23 years," he said, adding: "Russia is like a magnet. It draws weaker states towards it."
A professor of international relations, Igor Todorov, said the anti-EU mood among those struggling to get by was understandable: "The main factor here is emotion. But it's certainly true a part of Ukraine's economy is closely connected with Russia." The Kremlin, he added, had numerous economic levers it could pull to sabotage the economy and undermine Kiev. Moscow, for example, could ban Ukrainian goods, arguing that they don't meet Russian standards, Todorov said.
Mazur said the problems with Ukraine's economy were profound. They pre-dated this latest crisis, he said, and were possibly insoluble. Some factories had moved with the times. They had improved their ecological standards. Most, however, still relied on Soviet-era equipment and production processes. "Not much has been modernised. Nobody cares about the quality of products," he said. Foreign investment might be able to transform crumbling industries, but this would take time, he suggested.
But voices just as adamant urged caution, and few lawmakers said they were eager for a military confrontation. Mr. Corker said more punitive actions should be threatened only if Russia moved farther into Ukraine or threatened neighbors like Moldova. Senator Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, another member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said military assistance to a Ukrainian force of about 6,000 trained troops against the Russian military would be fruitless.
Also in Moscow, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu said that Ukrainian troops in Crimea who had chosen to remain in the Ukrainian Armed Forces had withdrawn. "The change in state symbols on all ships and in all divisions that have sided with the Russian army has been completed," he said. 
Russian foreign minister and US secretary of state enter talks again as 40,000 Russian troops mass on Ukraine border
The Russian has drawn international condemnation over his support for Syria's Bashar al-Assad and annexation of the Crimean region of Ukraine.
There was no direct confirmation from Russian officials. The Kremlin’s statement describing the same telephone conversation made no mention of any troop withdrawals. It said only that the leaders “discussed various aspects of the situation in Ukraine, including the possibility for international involvement in restoring stability” and that the pair had also talked about constitutional overhaul in Ukraine and another troubled region of Eastern Europe, the separatist Transnistria region of Moldova.For his part, Putin warned that sanctions against Russia over Ukraine would “in no way” resolve the crisis. Both leaders agreed the time was right for a new round of peace talks on Ukraine.
Macron described the two leaders’ conversation as “extremely frank and direct”, saying he had made clear “everything I thought on different subjects”. He said he would be “constantly vigilant” about gay rights in Chechnya, where Russian officials are actively investigating claims of a purge of gay men.
