Officials said six of the ship’s 462 passengers had died, at least 55 are injured and 179 have been rescued. Many passengers - of which 300 are children - may have been trapped inside the vessel as it listed and sank.
"Pretty much every law, rule, regulation and standard throughout the world says that yes, the captain must stay with the ship until all personnel are safely off of the ship, certainly passengers."
Passenger testimony indicated that the ship had struck rocks about 20 km off the coast of Byungpoong island.
"The ship is taking in water and sinking," a coastguard spokesman told AFP by phone as the rescue operation got under way. "There are around 450 people on board and we have coastguard vessels, commercial ships in the area, as well as helicopters all engaged in the rescue operation," the spokesman added.
The ferry operator reportedly asked passengers to stay inside their cabins, Kim said, adding that he had not heard an announcement urging people to leave the ship before it sank.
"There was a bang and then the ship suddenly tilted over," Yonhap quoted a 57-year-old survivor as saying. "Downstairs were restaurants, shops and entertainment rooms, and those who were there are feared to have failed to escape."
The Sewol took two and a half hours to sink, but many survivors have reported that the crew told passengers it was safer to stay put inside the ship, likely dooming them. (The captain says he later issued instructions for passengers to evacuate the ship, but it remains unclear if that was conveyed to passengers.)
"Pretty much every law, rule, regulation and standard throughout the world says that yes, the captain must stay with the ship until all personnel are safely off of the ship, certainly passengers."
The captain, Lee Joon-seok, has defended his decision to tell passengers to stay put as the ferry began sinking, saying he was concerned about the sea's strong currents and cold water as well as the lack of rescue ships.
The captain shakes his head, and says that he believes the Sewol captain has sullied the name of all Korean captains. He says this is the last time he will speak of this tragedy, hoping if he doesn't talk about it his nightmares about not being able to save the children will ease.
One of Ye-seul’s classmates could be heard pleading: “Save us, save us.” But one of the first things the Coast Guard rescuers did was help the ship’s captain, Lee Jun-seok, and other crew members off the sinking ferry.
At 9:03, one student wondered, “What is the captain doing?”
When he was deserting the ship, the 69-year-old captain was still in his underpants.