London (CNN) A social media campaign calling for Britons to wear safety pins as a sign of solidarity with the country's immigrant population has taken off following its decision to leave the EU last week.
News of a spike in racial abuse in the days after the referendum led to a social media campaign calling for people to wear safety pins as a sign of solidarity with the country's immigrant population.
"From the beginning, I've always said if you're going to wear the safety pin, you've got to back it up. So if you put it on, you are pledging to support people and to intervene and report if you see incidences of racial or xenophobic abuse."
Despite some backlash, Allison says most of the reaction has been "overwhelmingly positive." Three days since unwittingly launching the initiative against racism, she's thrilled by how many are taking to social media to share their #safetypins and reassure their fellow Britons that they are welcome and supported regardless of ethnicity or background.
Across Britain, hundreds of instances of racial abuse and hate crimes have been reported since the referendum, aimed not just at immigrants from European Union nations but also at blacks, Muslims and Asians from other places who were not central to the debate over European immigration. A Polish family’s home in Plymouth was set on fire on Thursday; the family was sent a letter that read, “Go back to your country,” and a warning that the family itself would be targeted next.
Some residents said the outbursts of racial abuse could reflect Leave voters’ disappointment at having to face, for months or even years, the very people they had implicitly rejected in the referendum.
Boston, a town of 67,000 residents, relies heavily on immigrants to work the nearby vegetable and potato fields and prepare food sold in British supermarkets for the minimum wage. Few immigrants claim welfare benefits. Their large presence — by some estimates immigrants from Central and Eastern Europe constitute more than 10 percent of the local population — has helped transform the region into a center for Britain’s agro-industry.
