London (CNN) A social media campaign calling for Britons to wear safety pins as a sign of solidarity with the country's immigrant population has taken off following its decision to leave the EU last week.
News of a spike in racial abuse in the days after the referendum led to a social media campaign calling for people to wear safety pins as a sign of solidarity with the country's immigrant population.
A string of racially motivated crimes have been reported in post-Brexit Britain. And as police begin investigations into allegations of hate crimes against the foreign-born population around the UK, Twitter user Allison (who goes by the handle @cheeahs ) suggested the simple sign of solidarity.
I quite like the idea of just putting a safety pin, empty of anything else, on your coat. A literal SAFETY pin!
Explaining the symbolism behind her idea, 30-year-old Allison tells CNN: "There's a woman in a hijab, she gets on the bus and there's an empty seat. She sees that there is a person wearing a safety pin sitting next to it (and) she just knows that she can sit there and they will not hassle her.
.@heliheartland wearing the pin signals my intentions to intervene and report - I can only hope others will do the same. #safetypin — miss pommery 1926 (@cheeahs) June 28, 2016
Additionally, Allison -- originally from the U.S. but a resident in the UK for the last six years -- is keen to point out wearing a safety pin should not be passive act, it's a pledge.
"From the beginning, I've always said if you're going to wear the safety pin, you've got to back it up. So if you put it on, you are pledging to support people and to intervene and report if you see incidences of racial or xenophobic abuse."
I am a Colombian immigrant in the UK working hard to make this country and the world a better place. Thanks for #safetypin — Valeria Vargas (@ValeruizVargas) June 29, 2016
The social movement is not dissimilar to #Illridewithyou, a hashtag campaign that emerged out of Sydney in 2014 following a flare up of anti-Muslim sentiment after a gunman took hostages in a CBD cafe.
I'm not wearing a #safetypin to prove that I'm not a halfwit. — Piers Morgan (@piersmorgan) June 29, 2016
If you are grown man or woman wearing a #safetypin as a protest then you desperately need a long, very long, hard look at yourself
But Allison also has a few choice words for commentators who think the campaign is pointless.
"I think those people really lack a sense of empathy for what it must be like to walk into a room or step on a train -- full of strangers -- and you just have to hope that none of them are going to come after you," she says. "I completely agree. It is patronizing if you just wear the pin and think you've done your job."
Despite some backlash, Allison says most of the reaction has been "overwhelmingly positive." Three days since unwittingly launching the initiative against racism, she's thrilled by how many are taking to social media to share their #safetypins and reassure their fellow Britons that they are welcome and supported regardless of ethnicity or background.
A small addition to my clothing today for solidarity against racism. #safetypin pic.twitter.com/sunKskLTKg — Albert Freeman (@AlbFreeman) June 29, 2016Some of his English clients, with whom he joked over the years, no longer talk to him. “In one week, you experience that some people you’ve known for three years change their attitudes 180 degrees,” he said.
But the town came to epitomize the nation’s rising antagonism against immigration, a central issue for voters in the referendum on June 23.
Across Britain, hundreds of instances of racial abuse and hate crimes have been reported since the referendum, aimed not just at immigrants from European Union nations but also at blacks, Muslims and Asians from other places who were not central to the debate over European immigration. A Polish family’s home in Plymouth was set on fire on Thursday; the family was sent a letter that read, “Go back to your country,” and a warning that the family itself would be targeted next.
In a statement before the case in Plymouth, the Polish Embassy in Britain said, “We are shocked and deeply concerned by the recent incidents of xenophobic abuse directed against the Polish community and other U.K. residents of migrant heritage.”
Like the town’s foreign residents, its English citizens are still unclear about what effects the vote to leave the European Union will bring. Although most of the candidates seeking to succeed David Cameron as Britain’s prime minister have sought to reassure European immigrants that they will not have to leave, no one really knows what residency status the immigrants will have once Britain negotiates its exit from the bloc or whether the flow of people into the country will reverse itself.
In any case, the negotiation is likely to take at least two years once it begins, and in the meantime there is no legal barrier to more European Union immigrants moving to Britain. As local residents realize that the immigrants are unlikely to be sent home soon — despite intimations of such an outcome by some Brexit advocates — frustration in Boston is mounting.
Mr. Pacho, the taxi-company owner, described the atmosphere as a balloon ready to burst with a single prick if it becomes clear that immigrants will not be forced to leave.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Some residents said the outbursts of racial abuse could reflect Leave voters’ disappointment at having to face, for months or even years, the very people they had implicitly rejected in the referendum.
There is anecdotal evidence that some immigrants are already leaving. The vote has affected the value of the pound. So some migrant workers, like factory employees or truck drivers, are already starting to return to the Continent because their salaries are worth less in the Polish zlotys, euros or Romanian leu that they send to help support families in their native countries.
Some Bostonians have gone out of their way to reassure their foreign neighbors, leaving messages of support or defending them from abuse. In one case, an Englishman protected a Polish woman from being spat on in the street. And some managers at food factories have sent emails to their immigrant employees expressing appreciation for their work and urging them to stay or apply for British citizenship.
Boston, a town of 67,000 residents, relies heavily on immigrants to work the nearby vegetable and potato fields and prepare food sold in British supermarkets for the minimum wage. Few immigrants claim welfare benefits. Their large presence — by some estimates immigrants from Central and Eastern Europe constitute more than 10 percent of the local population — has helped transform the region into a center for Britain’s agro-industry.
