(CNN) Forces loyal to Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan quashed a coup attempt by some members of the military that began Friday evening and devolved into turmoil and violence.
'Stunned resignation': readers' experiences of the Turkey coup attempt Read more
At least 290 died and more than 1,400 were wounded, according to Turkey's Foreign Ministry. Around 6,000 people have been detained so far.
Turkey Blocks, a group that tracks censorship in Turkey, tweets that all three services are blocked in the country. Dyn, another service that tracks Internet performance globally, reports that Facebook and Twitter are blocked for "about an hour."
Turkish state broadcaster TRT says it has been taken over by members of the military who were part of the coup attempt.
Saturday, 12:26 a.m. : Hours after the attempted coup against him began, : Hours after the attempted coup against him began, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan addresses the nation via FaceTime.
He says lower-ranking officers launched the coup, rebelling against senior officers.
Confronting a coup
Saturday, 2:51 a.m.: The Turkish National Intelligence unit claims the coup is over.
JUST WATCHED Turkey has a long history of military coups Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Turkey has a long history of military coups 00:56
Turkey's deputy prime minister, Mehmet Simsek, tells CNN by phone that the government is in full control after a failed coup attempt.
Video footage from Istanbul's Bosphorus Bridge shows soldiers apparently involved in the coup attempt surrendering en masse, walking away from tanks and abandoning their posts.
Daylight brings clearer pictures of the coup's chaos.
12:20 p.m.: Prime Minister Binali Yildirim tells a news conference the attempted coup is a "stain on democracy".
7:30 p.m.: Erdogan speaks to another cheering, flag-waving crowd, blaming the coup attempt on rival Fethullah Gulen, a cleric and former ally who lives in exile in Pennsylvania.
Erdoğan refuses to rule out execution of failed Turkey coup leaders Read more
Eight Turkish officers who fled to Greece by military helicopter during last week’s attempted coup have been handed suspended sentences by a Greek court, removing a potential obstacle to their extradition back to Turkey.
On the night of the attempted coup, all three main opposition parties condemned the rebellion and expressed their support for the elected president. It was a moment of rare political unity in Turkey, and seemed to have resonance within the wider population. People who protested against Erdoğan’s creeping authoritarianism back in 2013 now said that a coup was not the answer either. “Yes we have problems in Turkey,” Hişyar Özsoy, an MP for the pro-Kurdish People’s Democratic party, said that day. “But at the same time, no military intervention can be a solution.”
“The coup attempt did a lot of damage to the democratic opposition in Turkey,” said one human rights lawyer. “This could have been a chance for Turkey to overcome polarisation and violence, to finally democratise the country. But instead it is used as a pretext for Erdoğan to galvanise power.”
Hide Caption 33 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish security officers detain police officers, seen in black, in Istanbul, during a security shutdown on the Bosphorus Bridge. Hide Caption 34 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A military airplane is seen flying over Turkey. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan urged people to take to the streets and stand up to the military. Hide Caption 35 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People take cover near the Bosphorus Bridge as military airplanes fly overhead. Hide Caption 36 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish soldiers are seen on the Asian side of Istanbul.
“We are here because our compatriots in Germany are standing up for democracy and against the attempted military coup in Turkey,” said Turkey’s sports minister, Akif Çağatay Kılıç, who was at the rally.
More than 1,700 military personnel were last week dishonourably discharged for their role in the coup attempt, which saw a faction of the armed forces commandeer tanks, helicopters and warplanes in an attempt to topple the government. Erdoğan has said 237 people were killed and more than 2,100 wounded.
The number of public sector workers removed from their posts since the coup attempt is now at more than 66,000, including about 43,000 people in education, the Anadolu state-run news agency reported on Friday. The interior minister, Efkan Âlâ, said more than 18,000 people had been detained over the failed coup and that 50,000 passports had been cancelled.
Turkey's Twitter-banning prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, came to power after a big election win in 2002. Erdogan's party was staunchly Islamic, yet seemingly committed to electoral democracy. Its victory was hailed by many as a hopeful sign for the post-9/11 world. 
Yet from the start, Erdogan's Islamic democracy had a strongly authoritarian whiff to it. Through the Erdogan years, Turkey has led the world in the number of journalists jailed, ahead of both China and Iran. Erdogan's government banned YouTube for two years beginning in 2007, purged and jailed hundreds of politically uncongenial military officers and reshaped both police and the judiciary. 
The political strife in Turkey has found expression in Germany, which is home to the world’s biggest Turkish diaspora. The North Rhine-Westphalia state, where Cologne is located, is home to about one-third of Germany’s Turkish community.
Erdoğan enjoys a lot of support among the diaspora in Germany and about 1.5 million Turkish nationals living there can vote in Turkish elections. Erdoğan’s Justice and Development party (AKP) received 60% of the vote from Germany in last November’s election, a bigger share than in Turkey."More than 2.5 million tweets -- or over 17,000 per minute -- were reportedly posted (from Turkey) in the first 24 hours after the ban, according to several media reports.
Erdogan and his Islamic regime lifted restrictions on the wearing of hijab in public buildings. He abolished the daily pledge of allegiance to a secular Turkey required in all Turkish schools since 1933. He downgraded the longstanding Turkish relationship with Israel and mused instead about a "neo-Ottoman" role for Turkey at the head of the Middle East's Muslim nations. He and his party passed restrictions on the sale and promotion of alcohol and boldly disavowed the equality of the sexes. 
Turkish voters overlooked and forgave these infringements. They elected and twice re-elected Erdogan. Turkey achieved genuine economic progress during his rule. Ordinary Turks believed that their blunt, traditionalist prime minister cherished their interests in a way his more cosmopolitan predecessors did not.
Erdogan has responded with more censorship and more controls, culminating in the Twitter ban. That ban failed -- yet the underlying problem remains: the country that was once the West's most reliable partner in the Islamic world is not so reliable any more. Turkey defies embargoes to trade with Iran. Turkish foreign policy has sought to build relationships with everyone and anyone except Turkey's traditional Western partners: with Syria, China, Russia, anyone.
Erdoğan had been on vacation in Marmaris when the coup attempt occurred. A group of soldiers that raided his hotel is believed to have missed the president by an hour or less.
HootSuite, a Vancouver, Canada-based startup that measures and analyzes Twitter marketing campaigns, said in a corporate blog post that its traffic from Turkey tripled in the first day after the ban.
Earlier on Sunday, state media reported that 1,400 military personnel had been dismissed over suspected links to the exiled cleric Fethullah Gülen – blamed by the Turkish government for the attempted coup. Gülen denies having orchestrated the putsch. The dismissals come a day after Erdoğan moved to bring the military firmly under his control by announcing that the chief of staff would report to him.
Europe had Christian Democratic parties; why couldn't Turkey have a Muslim Democratic party? Indeed, Erdogan-style Muslim Democracy seemed a decade ago the striking alternative to radical Islamism, a political alternative that would integrate religion into politics while preserving individual freedom and democratic decision-making.
Audio was posted to social media that purported to reveal the prime minister in plots with his son to collect and conceal tens of millions of Euros in illegal cash. (Erdogan has claimed that a corruption investigation that entangled four of his former cabinet ministers is a "coup plot" and that some of the recordings are "immorally edited material".)
