Facebook Twitter Pinterest A woman picks up a yellow ribbon - a symbol of the Hong Kong pro-democracy movement. Photograph: ALEX OGLE/AFP/Getty Images
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
While he has focused on the battle for democracy, Wong has also sought to bring more citizens into the fold by spreading the message that politics is about ordinary life, not a disruption to or distraction from it.
Vladislav Surkov, a Putin aide named in the sanctions, called it "a great honor" to be singled out for American punishment.
"I believe this is essential to achieving a stable and lasting framework for peaceful development," he said.
Several of the young people occupying the business district told CNN they were going to stay overnight. 
"Thus far, it looks like most Taiwanese don't want reunification so long as China remains an authoritarian state with little respect for human rights," he said.
Nobody knew when, or if, the protest would occur, but in August Beijing passed a reform framework to stipulate universal suffrage on its own terms – only two or three committee-vetted candidates who “love the country” would be allowed to run. Activists considered this the last straw. Students began a class boycott last Monday and, galvanised by a city-wide surge in support, staged a large-scale protest outside of the city government headquarters on Friday night. Occupy Central mobilised on Sunday. The rest is unfolding as you read.
"I personally have a very high opinion of President Ma, and I think he has the balance right. His main difficulties are being accused of 'coddling the tyrants in Beijing' of course."
"The stability of Hong Kong is crucial," Victor Gao, director of the China National Association of International Studies told CNN from Beijing.  "There are better channels for people in Hong Kong to express their positions, rather than resorting to illegal means of creating disturbances and counterproductive means of preventing other people... to go along with their lives."
