“We have to raise our bargaining power,” Alex Chow Yong Kang, the secretary general of the Hong Kong Federation of Students, said in an interview. “We have to tell them that Hong Kong people are willing to sacrifice much more.”
In an early morning video statement addressed to all Hong Kong residents, Hong Kong Chief Executive C.Y. Leung called for people to leave. He said police have exercised the greatest possible restraint in dealing with the protesters.
A telephone poll conducted this month by researchers from the Chinese University of Hong Kong and released over the weekend vividly demonstrated the generational divide. While 54 percent of Hong Kong’s Cantonese-speaking residents said the city’s Legislative Council should veto electoral changes if they excluded candidates whose political positions differed from the Chinese government’s, that percentage went up to 76 among people ages 15 to 24.
"The protesters are unhappy because Hong Kong is becoming more and more like China," Chinese tourist, 24-year old Liujing, from Hainan, told CNN at spillover protests in the Mong Kok region of Kowloon. "I support them because growing up, we always admired Hong Kong. If Hong Kong became like China then that would be a real shame."
Hong Kong’s chief executive? That’s right. All the pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong that you’ve been reading about lately? They are calling for CY Leung to be removed from office.
"Xi Jinping does not want to be seen as someone who can't manage a bunch of students in Hong Kong," David Zweig, a professor at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology told CNN, referring to China's president.  
Just yards from where thousands of pro-democracy supporters have been "occupying" the heart of Hong Kong's financial district, stands an imposing gray building surrounded on all sides by a high wall -- this is the Hong Kong garrison of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), China's armed forces.
“Of course we love China, but we are worried about damage to Hong Kong economics. That’s why we’re here,” he added.What Prompted the Hong Kong Protests? Hong Kong belongs to China and operates under a policy of “one country, two systems.” Hong Kong, a British colony until 1997, when China resumed sovereignty, is governed by a mini-constitution, the Basic Law.
“Hong Kong has been acting as a reference point for China — whatever they want to do, they come to Hong Kong to take a look first, and if it is good they pick it up,” said Li Kui-Wai, an associate professor of economics and finance at the City University of Hong Kong. “In a sense, they are trying to catch up with us.”
“People used to not care so much about politics, and they used to not think so much of Hong Kong as home before 1997,” said Dennis Kwok, 36, a Hong Kong-born lawyer and lawmaker who returned in 2000 and renounced his Canadian citizenship. “But since 1997, the younger people want to have a greater say in public affairs, and they think of Hong Kong as home.”
“What is happening in Hong Kong is about the people of Hong Kong, and any assertion otherwise is an attempt to distract from the issue at hand, which is the people of Hong Kong expressing their desire for universal suffrage and an election that provides a meaningful choice of candidates representative of the voters’ will,” said Scott Robinson, the spokesman for the United States Consulate in Hong Kong. He added that, “U.S. diplomats regularly meet with a broad cross-section of Hong Kong society both in Hong Kong and in Washington and do not support any particular political party or person.”
The Hong Kong television station TVB showed about six plainclothes officers in police vests leading the man, later identified as Ken Tsang – a social worker and member of Hong Kong’s pro-democracy Civic party – away from a protest site, his hands bound behind his back. The officers took him to a dark corner behind a nearby building and threw him to the ground. Some kicked and beat him, while others kept watch.
Ken Tsang, a Hong Kong pro-democracy activist, is taken away by police. Photograph: Philippe Lopez/AFP/Getty Images
Hong Kong’s secretary for security, Lai Tung-kwok, said the officers involved would be temporarily removed from duties, as authorities expressed concern over the clip and promised an investigation.
Also on Wednesday, Hong Kong’s most prominent tycoon, Li Ka-shing, broke his silence over the protests to urge the demonstrators to go home. Li, Asia’s richest man, said that if Hong Kong’s rule of law broke down it would be the city’s “greatest sorrow”.
Hong Kong police officers moved in on pro-democracy protesters who blockaded a road near the city government’s headquarters. Photograph: EyePress/Sipa/Rex
Amnesty International also condemned the “vicious” attack. “It is stomach-churning to think there are Hong Kong police officers that feel they are above the law,” Mabel Au, the director of Amnesty Hong Kong, said in a statement.
That song has been used at other demonstrations around the world, but only in Hong Kong is it performed in English and Cantonese. And the version in Cantonese — the dialect of Hong Kong and southern China, whose use Beijing has been working to limit in recent years — was rewritten around the dream of achieving democracy.
Hong Kong’s mixed cultural heritage runs deep even among the police officers now charged with enforcing Beijing’s will in the territory. Ethnically, the 30,000-strong force is 99 percent Hong Kong Chinese, but its culture is eclectically Western, from its hierarchical structure to its off-duty rituals. At an official dinner a few years ago, I commented that the ceremonial garb included distinctive plaids from Scotland, including the bright red Mackintosh tartan. An officer next to me shook his head. “No,” he said, “that tartan signifies Hong Kong Island officers, and the one over there is from Kowloon.” Then a bagpipe player escorted a man carrying a pewter tray with a shot glass of amber liquid — a wee dram not of whisky, but of Chinese tea.
Scientists have long debated the pros and cons of crossbreeding. Botanists mock the bauhinia, the flower that represents Hong Kong on flags and coins, by pointing out that it is a sterile hybrid. But hear the protesters sing “I hope one day you’ll join us and the world will live as one” to their police cousins over the barricades, and you know the Hong Kong blend produces beautiful children.
Nury Vittachi is a columnist and author based in Hong Kong.