Japan’s finance minister says calm returning but signals readiness to intervene over rising yen, while analysts point to signs a UK recession is being priced in
She said the cabinet would hold an emergency meeting on Wednesday morning but appeared to rule out any negotiations, saying: “Dialogue between democrats takes place within the law, respects the rules of the game and doesn’t make them up as it goes along.”
The economy minister, Nobuteru Ishihara, said on Tuesday that stimulus measures were likely to include assistance for small businesses.
“There are concerns about lessening the impact of the British referendum on Japan’s small and medium-sized companies,” Ishihara said.
Sources said the government was willing to spend at least 10tn yen ($98bn) due to worries about exports, domestic demand and Japanese firms operating in Britain.
The Japanese finance minister, Taro Aso, said on Tuesday that financial markets were calmer but stressed the need to keep a close watch on currency markets and said he stood ready to respond if necessary.
David Donabedian, chief investment officer of Atlantic Trust Private Wealth Management, said: “Markets already appear to be pricing in a full-blown recession in the UK and rising recession risk in the rest of Europe.”
The political uncertainty now present is starkly illustrated by the diametrically opposed views of Rudd’s deputy minister, Andrea Leadsom. Brexit was a “superb result” for the UK, she said. Leadsom said freedom from EU laws on state aid would benefit UK bill payers, though how looser rules on subsidies would achieve that is unclear. Michael Gove, another leading Brexiter, said the 5% VAT charged on energy could be cut.
Jonathan Grant, director at consultants PwC, said: “Many supporters of Brexit [are] also opposed to climate policies such as carbon taxes and efficiency standards.”
EDF claims Brexit does not affect their plans, but other big clean energy players have expressed worries. “We still want to grow in the UK, particularly in wind power, but clearly a significant change like an exit from the EU introduces more risk to the sector for an unforeseen period of time,” said a spokesman for Vattenfall. SSE said political risk had risen.
“Business really hates uncertainty,” said Nick Molho, at the Aldersgate Group. But he said the global surge in clean energy and action on climate change provided very strong reasons for the UK follow suit, even from outside the EU.
Virgin billionaire says ‘thousands and thousands’ of jobs will be lost following the decision to leave the EU
He said his opinion that leaving the EU would damage investment in Britain was shared by “every single person I’ve met from overseas”.
In the first meeting of Parliament since the referendum, Mr. Cameron said he considered the vote binding, though he reiterated that he would leave to his successor the decision to start the formal withdrawal process. “The decision must be accepted and the process of implementing the decision in the best possible way must now begin,” he said.
Mr. Johnson also played down the central issue of the campaign, immigration, saying it was not really what Britons were voting on, despite considerable evidence that it was.
Alex Salmond, a member of Parliament and a former leader of the Scottish National Party, blamed the British government for the political vacuum, saying that neither Mr. Cameron nor Mr. Johnson had taken ownership of the mess. “If you break it, you own it,” he said.
Of European parliament members: "They don't like me. It's mutual," he says
"We are absolutely going to have to provide fiscal security to people," he said. "In other words, we're going to have to show the country and the world that the government can live within its means."
The chancellor of the exchequer said ahead of the vote that an emergency budget would be needed to fill a "black hole" of about £30 billion ($42.6 billion) per year if the U.K. left the EU.
A Virgin spokesperson said the group had been looking to buy a company employing 3,000 people, but the deal would now not go ahead.
"The Virgin Group is concerned by the ongoing instability and this will impact new expansion in the next few years in the U.K.," the spokesperson said.
"I suspect we've lost a third of our value, which is dreadful to people in the workplace," he said.
Branson has been deeply critical of the vote to quit the EU, saying it has fractured the country more than any other event in recent memory.
The Virgin Group CEO campaigned against Brexit. He wants a second vote on the issue, saying the public have realized they were misled and might change their view.
Nearly 4 million people have signed a petition calling for a new referendum. Parliament should consider it, Branson said.
Cameron says the loss of Scotland would leave the United Kingdom "deeply diminished." While only 4 million people will vote, he says, the result will impact 63 million within the United Kingdom.
“During the referendum campaign, I said I want my country back,” Mr. Farage said on Monday. “What I’m saying today is I want my life back, and it begins right now.”
Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets, said: “The pound has continued to come under pressure in the past couple of days sinking to new 31 year lows.
• The Bank of England, which released a financial stability report on Tuesday, warned of a “challenging” outlook for the markets, and it took steps that will let banks lend an additional 150 billion pounds ($200 billion) to businesses and households to prevent credit from drying up.
That would be bad news for banks. "Rate cuts by the ECB could make Italian banks even weaker in the short term," said Jack Allen, an economist at Capital Economics.
The chief executive of JPMorgan (JPM) said before the June 23 referendum he thought Brexit would be a "terrible deal for the British economy." Asked by an Italian newspaper how the European Union should now respond to the vote, Dimon said it must work together to address its weaknesses.
The Brexit vote provides both a reason and an opportunity to enable this democratic decision. The British government should respect the popular vote in the North for European Union membership by bringing forward a referendum on Irish unity. The Irish government, too, should act on this.
Remain secured 48% of the vote -- not enough to secure victory.
While Scotland voted to remain part of the UK in 2014, with 55% of people voting against independence, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon has now said another independence referendum could be on the table following Brexit.
"What we're getting is exactly what the crowd is saying about a place," Ady said. 
“The Brexit vote has put the manufacturing sector’s recovery in jeopardy,” said Lee Hopley, chief economist at EEF.
British Airways owner International Airlines Group has reported disappointing profits and lowered its full-year forecast, blaming terror attacks, the Brexit vote and strikes for a downturn in travel.
