The confrontation with Beijing has moved the territory to the front lines of the battle for democratic rights in China since a government clampdown silenced much dissent on the mainland. Since Hong Kong was returned by Britain to Chinese rule in 1997, it has enjoyed considerable legal autonomy under the “one country, two systems” formula, in which Hong Kong residents retained rights not available elsewhere in China.
In an early morning video statement addressed to all Hong Kong residents, Hong Kong Chief Executive C.Y. Leung called for people to leave. He said police have exercised the greatest possible restraint in dealing with the protesters.
“We have to raise our bargaining power,” Alex Chow Yong Kang, the secretary general of the Hong Kong Federation of Students, said in an interview. “We have to tell them that Hong Kong people are willing to sacrifice much more.”
A telephone poll conducted this month by researchers from the Chinese University of Hong Kong and released over the weekend vividly demonstrated the generational divide. While 54 percent of Hong Kong’s Cantonese-speaking residents said the city’s Legislative Council should veto electoral changes if they excluded candidates whose political positions differed from the Chinese government’s, that percentage went up to 76 among people ages 15 to 24.
On Monday, he met a delegation of some of Hong Kong’s wealthiest tycoons, many of whom have argued that street protests like those threatened by Occupy Central would imperil the city’s reputation for business-friendly stability. In published comments afterward, he told the business leaders that the Chinese government’s basic policies on Hong Kong “have not changed and will not change,” Xinhua, the state-run news agency, reported.
Searches on China's top search engine sites such as Baidu and Sogou for the terms "Hong Kong protest" or even "Hong Kong students" yielded irrelevant results such as stories showing a a blissful image of Hong Kong residents picnicking on the grass or how Hong Kong is welcoming tourists from the mainland during the national holiday week. 
Hong Kong’s chief executive? That’s right. All the pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong that you’ve been reading about lately? They are calling for CY Leung to be removed from office.
"Xi Jinping does not want to be seen as someone who can't manage a bunch of students in Hong Kong," David Zweig, a professor at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology told CNN, referring to China's president.  
Just yards from where thousands of pro-democracy supporters have been "occupying" the heart of Hong Kong's financial district, stands an imposing gray building surrounded on all sides by a high wall -- this is the Hong Kong garrison of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), China's armed forces.
“Of course we love China, but we are worried about damage to Hong Kong economics. That’s why we’re here,” he added.“Hong Kong has been acting as a reference point for China — whatever they want to do, they come to Hong Kong to take a look first, and if it is good they pick it up,” said Li Kui-Wai, an associate professor of economics and finance at the City University of Hong Kong. “In a sense, they are trying to catch up with us.”
“People used to not care so much about politics, and they used to not think so much of Hong Kong as home before 1997,” said Dennis Kwok, 36, a Hong Kong-born lawyer and lawmaker who returned in 2000 and renounced his Canadian citizenship. “But since 1997, the younger people want to have a greater say in public affairs, and they think of Hong Kong as home.”
“What is happening in Hong Kong is about the people of Hong Kong, and any assertion otherwise is an attempt to distract from the issue at hand, which is the people of Hong Kong expressing their desire for universal suffrage and an election that provides a meaningful choice of candidates representative of the voters’ will,” said Scott Robinson, the spokesman for the United States Consulate in Hong Kong. He added that, “U.S. diplomats regularly meet with a broad cross-section of Hong Kong society both in Hong Kong and in Washington and do not support any particular political party or person.”
Also on Wednesday, Hong Kong’s most prominent tycoon, Li Ka-shing, broke his silence over the protests to urge the demonstrators to go home. Li, Asia’s richest man, said that if Hong Kong’s rule of law broke down it would be the city’s “greatest sorrow”.
The revolution will not be televised but it will be tweeted, instant messaged or, in the case of Hong Kong, broadcast on mesh networks like FireChat.
Pro-democracy demonstrators recapture part of bustling district in Hong Kong
On Saturday afternoon, Hong Kong’s chief secretary, Carrie Lam, set a date for a dialogue with the Hong Kong Federation of Students, a surprising conciliatory gesture given the demonstrators’ recalcitrance.
That protest, fueled by youngsters, is now continuing into its fourth week in Hong Kong. 
The protests have created a divide among the celebrities in Hong Kong. Many have remained silent, while others have been outspoken in their criticism of the protests and their supporters in the entertainment industry.
