Gravitational waves: 'we can hear the universe' – live Read more
Gravitational waves: breakthrough discovery after a century of expectation Read more
Gravitational waves: everything you need to know Read more
For example, so-called Dark Energy, which drives the accelerating expansion of the universe, may affect the way gravitational waves travel to Earth from their distant sources, and that means we might get some clues as to what Dark Energy actually is. There may be unexpected sources of gravitational waves out there. Gravitational waves are obviously a lot harder to see than electromagnetic waves – light, radio, microwaves – but if we think how much we have learned from astronomy using ripples in electromagnetic fields, it is impossible not to be thrilled by the prospect of studying the universe using ripples in spacetime itself.
Physicists have announced the discovery of gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric of spacetime that were first anticipated by Albert Einstein a century ago.
“We have detected gravitational waves. We did it,” said David Reitze, executive director of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (Ligo), at a press conference in Washington.
The detector was switched off in January for a further upgrade: astronomers still have to decipher months of material collected in the interval. But – given half a century of frustration in the search for gravitational waves – what they found exceeded expectation: suddenly, in the mutual collapse of two black holes, they could eavesdrop on the violence of the universe.
“Einstein, when he came to write down his theory of gravity, his two heroes were Faraday and Maxwell,” said Turok. “He tried to write down laws of the gravitational field and he wasn’t in the least surprised to discover that his predictions had waves, gravitational waves.”
• The headline to this article was amended on 12 February 2016. An earlier version said the discovery was a breakthrough after two centuries of expectation. This has been corrected."We have detected gravitational waves. We did it," said David Reitze, executive director of LIGO, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory , which was created to do just what Reitze announced.
Gravitational waves were predicted by Einstein in his general theory of relativity in 1915, the theory that proposed space-time as a concept. The waves are a distortion of space-time.
But is LIGO correct? Have we really detected gravitational waves?
Scientists have what they call a "five-sigma" standard of proof, and LIGO's researchers say the gravitational wave discovery exceeds that.
Ironically, Einstein didn't think gravitational waves would be discovered.
The discovery of dark matter, argued cosmologist Carlos Frenk at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, would be more important than the detection of gravitational waves.
Gravitational waves: what breakthroughs can we expect next? Read more
