Facebook Twitter Pinterest South Korean coastguards on the rescue operation around the stricken passenger ferry Sewol on Wednesday. Photograph: Yonhap/EPA
After alerting the center that the ferry was rolling, the Sewol stated that "the body of the ship is tilted to the left. Containers fell over, too."
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Coastguards rescuing passengers and crew aboard the South Korean ferry Sewol which sank on Wednesday on its way to Jeju island from Incheon. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images
Passenger testimony indicated that the ship had struck rocks about 20 km off the coast of Byungpoong island.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest An injured passenger is stretchered by rescue personnel after ferry Sewol sank in waters off South Korea on Wednesday. Photograph: Yonhap/EPA
"The ship is taking in water and sinking," a coastguard spokesman told AFP by phone as the rescue operation got under way. "There are around 450 people on board and we have coastguard vessels, commercial ships in the area, as well as helicopters all engaged in the rescue operation," the spokesman added.
The pupils, from Danwon high school in Ansan city near Seoul, were on their way to Jeju, a popular tourist destination, for a four-day study trip. The ship left Incheon port on Tuesday evening, according to
Dramatic images on South Korean TV showed the capsized ship tilted 45 degrees on its port side. Later, the vessel appeared to have inverted and was almost completely submerged."As the ferry was shaking and tilting, we all tripped and bumped into each another," Lim said from a gymnasium on a nearby island, where he and other survivors were being treated.
Kim Seong-mok told YTN he was certain people were trapped inside the ship as water levels quickly rose inside. The vessel's severe tilt prevented many from reaching exits from where they might have been able to leap into the sea to be picked up by rescue boats.
Some people yelled at those who couldn't get out, urging them to break windows, said Kim, who had just eaten breakfast when he felt the ferry tilt and then crash into something.
The ferry operator reportedly asked passengers to stay inside their cabins, Kim said, adding that he had not heard an announcement urging people to leave the ship before it sank.
"There was a bang and then the ship suddenly tilted over," Yonhap quoted a 57-year-old survivor as saying. "Downstairs were restaurants, shops and entertainment rooms, and those who were there are feared to have failed to escape."
Navy divers trying to locate people still trapped inside the ship were frustrated by poor visibility created by mud stirred up from the seabed.
The Sewol took two and a half hours to sink, but many survivors have reported that the crew told passengers it was safer to stay put inside the ship, likely dooming them. (The captain says he later issued instructions for passengers to evacuate the ship, but it remains unclear if that was conveyed to passengers.)
"Pretty much every law, rule, regulation and standard throughout the world says that yes, the captain must stay with the ship until all personnel are safely off of the ship, certainly passengers."
The authorities in other countries should also review their laws and procedures. Many such pledges were made after the Italian cruise ship Costa Concordia struck a rock and was wrecked in the Mediterranean in 2012, with the loss of 32 lives, yet the fate of the Sewol shows that much remains to be done on planning for emergency evacuations. The Costa Concordia, of course, is notorious also for the flight of the captain, Francesco Schettino, before most of the passengers were rescued. Mr. Schettino is currently on trial, charged with causing a shipwreck, manslaughter and abandoning ship. Captain Lee and six crew members of the Sewol have also been arrested. Under South Korean law, abandoning passengers at a time of crisis is punishable by life in prison.Steeped in regret for what he clearly sees as a needless waste of life, the captain wonders what would have happened if the other ship's crew had followed protocol.
Among the text messages, photos and video clips that have been produced by passengers of the ill-fated ship, Su-hyeon’s 15-minute footage bears the most dramatic witness to the panic and fear, as well as youthful naïveté and optimism, of the students trapped inside the ship while many of the crew members, including the captain, were among the first to desert their vessel.
“The ship is leaning!” one passenger can be heard saying.
Over the intercom, the students were again urged not to move and to hold onto what they could. The ship’s captain and crew members later told reporters and investigators that they had thought it was safer for the passengers to stay in their cabins than to move in a panicked mass, causing the ship to list faster, or for them to jump into cold waters when the rescue ships were still far away.
At 9:03, one student wondered, “What is the captain doing?”
Mr. Lee, the captain, was in his room and the least experienced of his four mates was in charge of its navigation when the vessel suddenly listed in waters notorious for rapid and unpredictable currents. Mr. Lee and 14 other crew members have been arrested on charges of abandoning their passengers in an emergency.
When he was deserting the ship, the 69-year-old captain was still in his underpants.As students felt the ship shuddering and wondered whether it was sinking, a crew member came onto the intercom, urging students to stay put.
At 8:55, while the ship’s crew sent its first distress signal, one student in the cabin below shouted, “We don’t want to die!”
“Yes, sir!” a few students responded in a hopeful tone. But another questioned the instruction: “What’s going on? If they are telling us to wear life jackets, doesn’t that mean that the ship is sinking?”
One of Ye-seul’s classmates could be heard pleading: “Save us, save us.” But one of the first things the Coast Guard rescuers did was help the ship’s captain, Lee Jun-seok, and other crew members off the sinking ferry.
“What? Hurry! Save us!” a student shrieked. Another wondered, “Are we going to die?” A minute later, as the ship listed further, some students suggested donning life jackets. An announcement over the intercom again instructed passengers to stay where they were.
Three minutes later, students yelled “Silence! Silence!” as the ship’s intercom crackled again, repeating the same message: Stay put and wear life jackets if possible.
