At the pithead, Yefromov was gloomy about the mine's prospects. Instead of the EU, Ukraine would be better off joining Vladimir Putin's rival Eurasian Union, he suggested. "It's our only chance," he said.
In an interview Tuesday with PBS, acting Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said Ukraine is struggling to maintain a fighting capability after it was "deliberately dismantled" under Yanukovych. He said his government ceded Crimea without a shot to demonstrate to the world that Russia was the aggressor, he said. But if Moscow moves against another portion of Ukraine, "We will fight."
With bankruptcy looming and its currency enfeebled, Ukraine has received offers of help from the International Monetary Fund, the US and the EU. The new interim government says the country is on the brink of default, and accuses Yanukovych and his entourage of stealing $70bn.
Since last month pro-Russian protesters have regularly gathered in the city's Lenin Square. Their key demand is federalisation – greater autonomy for the east. Another is that the new government abandons its plan for European integration. "The EU doesn't want Ukraine. And we don't want the EU. We regard the signing of the association agreement as capitulation," an IT programmer, Roman Protsenko, said. Only friendly relations with "brotherly" Russia could bring prosperity, he argued, saying that Russia, Belarus and Ukraine shared history and orthodox religion.
Others said that two decades after Ukraine became independent, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, living standards had scarcely improved, with many surviving on pathetically low wages. Sergey – a 51-year-old anti-Maidan protester – said he was unemployed and that he and his wife, Irina, survived on her salary of $200 a month. "We've put up with these conditions for 23 years," he said, adding: "Russia is like a magnet. It draws weaker states towards it."
A professor of international relations, Igor Todorov, said the anti-EU mood among those struggling to get by was understandable: "The main factor here is emotion. But it's certainly true a part of Ukraine's economy is closely connected with Russia." The Kremlin, he added, had numerous economic levers it could pull to sabotage the economy and undermine Kiev. Moscow, for example, could ban Ukrainian goods, arguing that they don't meet Russian standards, Todorov said.
Mazur said the problems with Ukraine's economy were profound. They pre-dated this latest crisis, he said, and were possibly insoluble. Some factories had moved with the times. They had improved their ecological standards. Most, however, still relied on Soviet-era equipment and production processes. "Not much has been modernised. Nobody cares about the quality of products," he said. Foreign investment might be able to transform crumbling industries, but this would take time, he suggested.
But voices just as adamant urged caution, and few lawmakers said they were eager for a military confrontation. Mr. Corker said more punitive actions should be threatened only if Russia moved farther into Ukraine or threatened neighbors like Moldova. Senator Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, another member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said military assistance to a Ukrainian force of about 6,000 trained troops against the Russian military would be fruitless.
Russia has said its troops are carrying out snap military exercises in the region.
Shirreff said the question of whether the army being more dependent on reservists would work or not has been left unanswered, but he said it was "one hell of a risk".
Asked whether he regretted making the comments, Farage told the Chatham House audience: "I said it just after parliament had voted not to go to war in Syria, thank God. One of the things Putin said did actually change the debate in this country … I did make it perfectly clear. It depends what it means by the word … I said I don't like him, I wouldn't trust him and I wouldn't want to live in his country, but compared with the kids who run foreign policy in this country, I've more respect for him than our lot."
"We want no truck with the BNP types at all," he said. "What we did, starting with the Oldham byelection in the north of England, is for the first time ever try to deal with the BNP question by going out and saying to BNP voters, 'If you are voting BNP because you are frustrated, upset with the change in your community, but you are doing it holding your nose because you don't agree with their racist agenda, come and vote for us.'
Last week, Farage said the European Union had "blood on its hands" for encouraging rebellion in Ukraine, Syria and Libya. While stressing he did not approve of Putin's annexation of Crimea, he said EU leaders had been "weak and vain", adding: "If you poke the Russian bear with a stick he will respond."
The Ukip leader also said his party had helped undermine the British National party by stealing a third of its voters. Farage said he was proud his party had given "frustrated" people a choice to avoid the group's racist agenda.
