Istanbul (CNN) Private Umut Tuna just finished basic training. The 20-year-old soldier was beginning his 12-month compulsory service in the Turkish Military.
On July 15th, a command came down to prepare for a drill, says Umut's sister Emel Koken. That drill turned out to be a coup attempt. Now his fate and that of over 1,600 conscripts hangs in the balance.
"He called me from a police station," she says. "He wasn't aware of the coup. He was told he was going out for a drill. He is very scared."
Many of the conscripts are being held in Silivri prison located on a windswept plain an hour outside of Istanbul.
In front of the main gate, dozens of families wait at a makeshift coffee shop with plastic chairs hoping to hear news regarding their loved ones.
Yasariye Tuckuran carries her two young children. Her husband's income sustained the family. She worries that he could not only lose his job but also his freedom.
"He was in his bed when they woke him for a night mission. He ran out the door in his slippers," says Tuckuran.
"My husband is completely innocent. My children cry out for their father. I need my husband back. He is our sole breadwinner."
Family members crowd around. Each one has a story declaring the innocence of their son, brother or father who is behind bars.
Loved ones camp outside prison
JUST WATCHED Turkey cracking down on coup plotters Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Turkey cracking down on coup plotters 01:46
In Turkey, able-bodied men have to join the military for up to a year of service. Many in the country see it as a rite of passage. After basic training, they are posted to various assignments for the rest of their year.
These families insist their loved ones are victims of the coup too. They say the soldiers' only crime is following the orders of their superior officers, something drilled into them at basic training.
Sukru Esoglu drove across the country to camp outside the prison with his wife. They borrowed their neighbor's car, stuffed it with pillows and blankets. Two chairs and a carpet mark their campsite.
"This is my home now until my son is released," says Esoglu.
This is my home now until my son is released Sukru Esoglu
On the night of the coup, President Reccip Tayyip Erdogan appeared on CNN Turk via FaceTime and urged his supporters to take to the street to fight for democracy.
Esoglu answered the president's call not knowing his son was on the other side.
"We didn't hear from our son when the coup began. We went to the square to perform our democratic duty. The next day, we were told our son had been arrested."
Crackdown criticized
Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Police try to stop people from attacking a judge, suspected in the failed coup plot, in Erzurum, Turkey on Tuesday, July 19. Turkey has fired or suspended about 50,000 people as the government intensifies a crackdown following last weekend's failed coup attempt. Teachers, journalists, police and judges have been affected. Hide Caption 1 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Police escort Turkish soldiers, accused of taking part in the attempted coup, as they leave a courthouse in Istanbul's Bakirkoy neighborhood on Saturday, July 16. Hide Caption 2 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish police officers cover the eyes of soldiers as they are transported in a bus from the courthouse in Istanbul on July 16. Hide Caption 3 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Akin Ozturk, front row, center, a four-star general and former commander of the Turkish air force, is among those in police custody whom President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's government has accused of having led the failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 4 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey In a mass detention in Ankara, dozens of detainees are forced to kneel, partially stripped. Hide Caption 5 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A man waves a Turkish flag from a car roof during a July 16 march around Kizilay Square in Ankara after the attempted military coup. Hide Caption 6 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Damaged vehicles are abundant outside the presidential palace in Ankara on July 16. Hide Caption 7 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People kick and beat a Turkish soldier suspected in the attempted coup on Istanbul's Bosphorus Bridge on July 16. Hide Caption 8 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Women react after people took over a military position on the Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul. Hide Caption 9 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People gather outside the Turkish Parliament in Ankara during an extraordinary session after the failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 10 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkey Prime Minister Binali Yildirim addresses the Turkish Parliament after the failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 11 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A protester rests on a bench as smoke billows from the Turkish military headquarters in Ankara. Hide Caption 12 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People stand under a huge Turkish flag during a march around Kizilay Square in Ankara in reaction to the attempted coup. Hide Caption 13 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Members of the Turkish military surrender on Istanbul's Bosphorus Bridge on after a failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 14 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People protesting against the coup wave a Turkish flag on top of a monument in Istanbul's Taksim Square. Hide Caption 15 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Clothes and weapons belonging to soldiers involved in the coup attempt are scattered on Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul. Hide Caption 16 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A Turkish police officer in Istanbul embraces a man on a tank in the wake of the violence overnight. Hide Caption 17 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Smoke billows from the direction of the Presidential Palace in Ankara on July 16. Hide Caption 18 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People gather on top of a Turkish military tank in Ankara in the morning after the coup attempt. National intelligence officials said the coup was put down and that the government remains in control. Hide Caption 19 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish people wave national flags from a car in Istanbul. Hide Caption 20 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People gather around a car damaged by a tank in Kizilay Square early on July 16. Hide Caption 21 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People take to the streets near the Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge during clashes with military forces in Istanbul. Hide Caption 22 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People escape the clashes in Ankara early Saturday. Hide Caption 23 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Tanks move into position as Turkish citizens attempt to stop them in Ankara. Hide Caption 24 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Citizens in Sivas rush to the streets during the chaotic coup attempt. Hide Caption 25 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A man approaches Turkish military with his hands up at the entrance to the partially closed Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul. Hide Caption 26 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A wounded man is given medical care at the entrance to the Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul after clashes with Turkish military. Hide Caption 27 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People react in front of the Justice and Development Party's headquarters in Karabuk. Hide Caption 28 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Soldiers secure an area as supporters of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan protest in Istanbul's Taksim Square. Hide Caption 29 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish military members make their way through the streets of Istanbul. Hide Caption 30 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Supporters of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan protest in front of soldiers in Istanbul's Taksim Square. Hide Caption 31 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey President Recep Tayyip Erdogan speaks on CNN Turk via a FaceTime call in Istanbul after members of the country's military attempted to overthrow the government. Hide Caption 32 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish soldiers block Istanbul's iconic Bosphorus Bridge.
Hide Caption 33 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish security officers detain police officers, seen in black, in Istanbul, during a security shutdown on the Bosphorus Bridge. Hide Caption 34 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A military airplane is seen flying over Turkey. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan urged people to take to the streets and stand up to the military. Hide Caption 35 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People take cover near the Bosphorus Bridge as military airplanes fly overhead. Hide Caption 36 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish soldiers are seen on the Asian side of Istanbul.
Hide Caption 37 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A Turkish security officer stands guard on the side of the road. Hide Caption 38 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish soldiers block Istanbul's Bosphorus Bridge. Hide Caption 39 of 39
Chaos gripped Turkey on the night of the coup. Elements within the military mobilized soldiers and tanks onto the streets. The ensuing clashes between the army and anti-coup protesters lead to the deaths of at least 246 people.
The attempt quickly failed. Soldiers laid down their guns and surrendered to the police and the anti-coup mob. Some soldiers appeared on TV covered in blood, bruised and scared. Over 9,000 soldiers have been taken into custody.
Pictures of detainees flooded social media showing them in their underwear and corralled in stables. Human rights groups condemned the treatment of the prisoners.
Amnesty International reports to have "gathered credible evidence that detainees in Turkey are being subjected to beatings and torture, including rape, in official and unofficial detention centers in the country."
It alleges the worst treatment is reserved for high-ranking military officers.
Pictures are surfacing in Turkey showing people detained in the wake of the failed coup against President Erdogan
The Turkish government shot back denying any wrongdoing. In a statement the they called the allegations "unsubstantial and unfounded" adding that the accusation "detainees are subject to rape are completely fictional claims and only amount to aspersion." The Justice Ministry insists anybody found guilty of torture will be held accountable.
The families at the prison don't believe their sons will be tortured as they were pawns in a political game. But, they worry about their futures. Will they now be branded as traitors for just doing their jobs?
"We are not traitors. We went to the squares with our flags," says Emel Koken. "I'm addressing the president. Please don't let these kids to be stigmatized as traitors."