(CNN) Forces loyal to Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan quashed a coup attempt by some members of the military that began Friday evening and devolved into turmoil and violence.
Turkey’s crackdown on military personnel and judges in the wake of Friday’s failed coup has been condemned in unusually strong terms by the German government. “Germany and the EU have an unambiguous position: we categorically reject the death penalty,” said Merkel’s spokesperson Steffen Seibert on Monday morning. “A country that has the death penalty cannot be a member of the European Union. The introduction of the death penalty in Turkey would therefore mean the end of EU accession talks.”
At least 290 died and more than 1,400 were wounded, according to Turkey's Foreign Ministry. Around 6,000 people have been detained so far.
Uniformed soldiers block the famous Bosphorus Bridge connecting the European and Asian sides of Istanbul. Cars flow from the European side to the Asian side, but soldiers and military vehicles block the path to the European side.
Some 300 people gather in Istanbul's Taksim Square, some waving Turkish flags. Army tanks and a military vehicle sit at the square.
Video and photos on social media show large crowds marching through the streets, some taunting soldiers as Turkish military fire guns in the air.
Turkey Blocks, a group that tracks censorship in Turkey, tweets that all three services are blocked in the country. Dyn, another service that tracks Internet performance globally, reports that Facebook and Twitter are blocked for "about an hour."
Military moves in
Friday, 11:25 p.m.: A faction of the military issues a declaration, saying the "political administration that has lost all legitimacy has been forced to withdraw."
JUST WATCHED Turkish military seen inside Turkish state TV Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Turkish military seen inside Turkish state TV 00:57
Turkish state broadcaster TRT says it has been taken over by members of the military who were part of the coup attempt.
Saturday, 12:26 a.m. : Hours after the attempted coup against him began, : Hours after the attempted coup against him began, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan addresses the nation via FaceTime.
Speaking to an anchor on CNN Turk, who holds up her phone so viewers can see, Erdogan urges people to take to the streets to stand up to the military faction behind the uprising.
"Go to the streets and give them their answer," he says.
He says lower-ranking officers launched the coup, rebelling against senior officers.
Confronting a coup
Saturday, 2:51 a.m.: The Turkish National Intelligence unit claims the coup is over.
JUST WATCHED Turkey has a long history of military coups Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Turkey has a long history of military coups 00:56
Turkey's deputy prime minister, Mehmet Simsek, tells CNN by phone that the government is in full control after a failed coup attempt.
6:30 a.m.: As dawn breaks, Erdogan is hailed by a throng of cheering supporters. He declares the coup over and says it was treason.
"The government is in control," he says. "Fifty percent of the people elected the President and that President is on duty."
Video footage from Istanbul's Bosphorus Bridge shows soldiers apparently involved in the coup attempt surrendering en masse, walking away from tanks and abandoning their posts.
Daylight brings clearer pictures of the coup's chaos.
12:20 p.m.: Prime Minister Binali Yildirim tells a news conference the attempted coup is a "stain on democracy".
He says the plotters will "be punished in every way they deserve."
7:30 p.m.: Erdogan speaks to another cheering, flag-waving crowd, blaming the coup attempt on rival Fethullah Gulen, a cleric and former ally who lives in exile in Pennsylvania.
Erdogan demands the United States arrest or extradite Gulen. "This country suffered a lot in the hands of the Gulen movement," Erdogan declares.We learnt what was happening via Twitter. It was a coup attempt. F-16 jets were flying low over Ankara and helicopters were used to control main government buildings. They dropped bombs on the Turkish grand national assembly for the first time in Turkey’s history. It was horrifying and inexcusable.
Turkey has demanded their return to stand trial for participation in Friday’s coup attempt. The eight deny involvement and have applied for asylum, saying they fear for their safety amid widespread purges in the aftermath of the attempted overthrow of the government.
On the night of the attempted coup, all three main opposition parties condemned the rebellion and expressed their support for the elected president. It was a moment of rare political unity in Turkey, and seemed to have resonance within the wider population. People who protested against Erdoğan’s creeping authoritarianism back in 2013 now said that a coup was not the answer either. “Yes we have problems in Turkey,” Hişyar Özsoy, an MP for the pro-Kurdish People’s Democratic party, said that day. “But at the same time, no military intervention can be a solution.”
However, the swift purge did not only target the Turkish military. During the week, almost 1,000 judges and prosecutors were detained and at least 2,745 judges were suspended from duty. According to the head prosecutor in Ankara, 1,200 privates had been released from custody by Saturday morning. Regular court hearings were delayed for hours due to a lack of personnel, and courts appointed to question the thousands of detained suspected coup plotters are working overtime. “An already overstretched judiciary is now at breaking point,” one lawyer said. “How will they run a country after decimating so many state institutions? We simply don’t know.”
American officials say they have not yet seen a weakening of Turkey’s resolve or ability to remain an active partner in the fight against the Islamic State, but they worry about aftershocks of the failed coup. The commander of American forces in the Middle East, Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the head of the United States Central Command, said on Thursday that many senior Turkish officers whom the United States deals with on counterterrorism were now in limbo, and some were in jail.
One of those who was freed, commentator Bulent Mumay, warned that the government was repeating past mistakes. Turkey has a chequered history on press freedom and was the world’s top jailer of journalists in 2012 and 2013. But the president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, has shrugged off international criticism of his post-coup crackdown, which has included a purge of the military, civil service, judiciary and education sector, the arrest of more than 18,000 people, telling the west to “mind its own business”.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Erdoğan supporters in Cologne on Sunday. Photograph: Thilo Schmuelgen/Reuters
Erdoğan had been on vacation in Marmaris when the coup attempt occurred. A group of soldiers that raided his hotel is believed to have missed the president by an hour or less.
Earlier on Sunday, state media reported that 1,400 military personnel had been dismissed over suspected links to the exiled cleric Fethullah Gülen – blamed by the Turkish government for the attempted coup. Gülen denies having orchestrated the putsch. The dismissals come a day after Erdoğan moved to bring the military firmly under his control by announcing that the chief of staff would report to him.
More than 1,700 military personnel were last week dishonourably discharged for their role in the coup attempt, which saw a faction of the armed forces commandeer tanks, helicopters and warplanes in an attempt to topple the government. Erdoğan has said 237 people were killed and more than 2,100 wounded.
The number of public sector workers removed from their posts since the coup attempt is now at more than 66,000, including about 43,000 people in education, the Anadolu state-run news agency reported on Friday. The interior minister, Efkan Âlâ, said more than 18,000 people had been detained over the failed coup and that 50,000 passports had been cancelled.
With mass purges of suspected Gülen supporters well under way in all state institutions, the media and some private companies, the Turkish football federation said on Sunday all its affiliated boards had resigned for the sake of “security checks”. It said it was cooperating fully with the authorities.
The political strife in Turkey has found expression in Germany, which is home to the world’s biggest Turkish diaspora. The North Rhine-Westphalia state, where Cologne is located, is home to about one-third of Germany’s Turkish community.
The Cologne rally was staged by groups including the pro-Erdoğan Union of European-Turkish Democrats.
Turkish diaspora in EU divided over Erdoğan following failed coup Read more
Meanwhile, skirmishes broke out at several smaller counter-demonstrations, with police moving in to separate about 80 rightwing nationalist Turks and 100 Kurds. About 250 far-right extremists, including some known hooligans, had also come together before being dispersed by police.
In an attempt to prevent violence between the camps, 2,700 officers – including several Turkish speakers – were on duty backed up by eight water cannon.
Erdoğan enjoys a lot of support among the diaspora in Germany and about 1.5 million Turkish nationals living there can vote in Turkish elections. Erdoğan’s Justice and Development party (AKP) received 60% of the vote from Germany in last November’s election, a bigger share than in Turkey.You've probably heard that the Turkish government's attempt to ban Twitter quickly collapsed into farce.
"More than 2.5 million tweets -- or over 17,000 per minute -- were reportedly posted (from Turkey) in the first 24 hours after the ban, according to several media reports.
HootSuite, a Vancouver, Canada-based startup that measures and analyzes Twitter marketing campaigns, said in a corporate blog post that its traffic from Turkey tripled in the first day after the ban.
Turkey is a NATO ally, a candidate for membership in the European Union, a front-line state facing Iran, Syria and Russia -- and it is heading seriously in the wrong direction. A lot of people have invested a lot of time and effort denying that unwelcome news. It can be denied no longer.
Turkey's Twitter-banning prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, came to power after a big election win in 2002. Erdogan's party was staunchly Islamic, yet seemingly committed to electoral democracy. Its victory was hailed by many as a hopeful sign for the post-9/11 world. 
Europe had Christian Democratic parties; why couldn't Turkey have a Muslim Democratic party? Indeed, Erdogan-style Muslim Democracy seemed a decade ago the striking alternative to radical Islamism, a political alternative that would integrate religion into politics while preserving individual freedom and democratic decision-making.
Erdogan and his Islamic regime lifted restrictions on the wearing of hijab in public buildings. He abolished the daily pledge of allegiance to a secular Turkey required in all Turkish schools since 1933. He downgraded the longstanding Turkish relationship with Israel and mused instead about a "neo-Ottoman" role for Turkey at the head of the Middle East's Muslim nations. He and his party passed restrictions on the sale and promotion of alcohol and boldly disavowed the equality of the sexes. 
At the same time, the Erdogan government did initiate important economic liberation of Turkey's traditionally state-led economy. He made concessions to ethnic and religious minorities. It seemed imaginable that Erdogan's reactionary religious message could somehow be fused with modern economics and tolerance. President Barack Obama certainly imagined so: In a 2012 interview with CNN's Fareed Zakaria, the President cited Prime Minister Erdogan as one of the five foreign leaders with whom he'd forged his closest "bonds of trust".
Yet from the start, Erdogan's Islamic democracy had a strongly authoritarian whiff to it. Through the Erdogan years, Turkey has led the world in the number of journalists jailed, ahead of both China and Iran. Erdogan's government banned YouTube for two years beginning in 2007, purged and jailed hundreds of politically uncongenial military officers and reshaped both police and the judiciary. 
Turkish voters overlooked and forgave these infringements. They elected and twice re-elected Erdogan. Turkey achieved genuine economic progress during his rule. Ordinary Turks believed that their blunt, traditionalist prime minister cherished their interests in a way his more cosmopolitan predecessors did not.
Then came the swirl of corruption rumors, corruption on a massive multi-billion dollar scale. Police fired tear gas and water cannon at people protesting the death of a 15-year-old boy who died in demonstrations against development of Gezi Park in central Istanbul. 
Audio was posted to social media that purported to reveal the prime minister in plots with his son to collect and conceal tens of millions of Euros in illegal cash. (Erdogan has claimed that a corruption investigation that entangled four of his former cabinet ministers is a "coup plot" and that some of the recordings are "immorally edited material".)
Erdogan has responded with more censorship and more controls, culminating in the Twitter ban. That ban failed -- yet the underlying problem remains: the country that was once the West's most reliable partner in the Islamic world is not so reliable any more. Turkey defies embargoes to trade with Iran. Turkish foreign policy has sought to build relationships with everyone and anyone except Turkey's traditional Western partners: with Syria, China, Russia, anyone.
With Russia's seizure of Crimea, the once-exotic and once-remote Black Sea region has suddenly emerged as a central global zone of conflict. Time was when the United States and the Western world could count on a steady, responsible and democratizing ally on the south shore of that sea. No more. The Twitter ban has collapsed. All the bad impulses that imposed that Twitter ban remain in place -- and will remain so long as Erdogan remains in office.
The promise of an Islamic version of Christian Democracy has proved a big lie. Instead, the country that was once the most stable, reliable and democratic state in the Islamic world seems now to have cast itself as the region's saddest backward-slider -- with its ever more authoritarian leader playing the role of an Islamic Vladimir Putin, or maybe Eva Peron. 
