He may also be trying to push Mr. Rajoy to fulfill his pledge to put an end to the secessionist challenge, which could in turn help galvanize Catalonia’s independence movement if Mr. Rajoy uses emergency measures to reduce the region’s level of autonomy.
Mr. Rajoy initiated a request last week for his government to invoke Article 155 of the Spanish Constitution — a broad, forceful tool that has never been used — that would allow him to take control of the region.
Facing a 10 a.m. deadline on Monday, Mr. Puigdemont asked for a meeting with Mr. Rajoy, according to a copy of his letter, and suggested that the conflict could be resolved, with the help of international mediators, within two months.
He also called on Mr. Rajoy to end “the repression against the Catalan people and government,” referring to a court summons issued for the chief of the autonomous Catalan police force and the two leaders of the main pro-independence citizens’ movements. All could face sedition charges.
The Catalan police chief, Josep Lluís Trapero, was questioned on Monday for a second time by Spain’s national court about why his officers could not stop a protest in September and why they failed to close polling stations before the voting started, as had been ordered by Madrid. The referendum was marred by violent clashes between voters and the national police.
The judge in charge of the case indicted Major Trapero on Monday. But the judge rejected the prosecution’s demand that the chief be held in jail without bail pending a trial. Significantly, however, the judge ordered the two leaders of the largest pro-independence citizens’ movements to be detained without bail while the authorities determine whether to charge them with sedition.
Late Monday, the main separatist movements said that they planned protests on Tuesday in Barcelona and other Catalan cities and called for a work stoppage at noon to protest the detention of the two leaders.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
In his letter, Mr. Puigdemont wrote that “the priority for my government is to search intensely for dialogue.” But he did not address the crucial question: whether he had declared independence in his address to Parliament last week.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
The speech, which came after a highly disputed referendum on the matter on Oct. 1, was meant to create “deliberate confusion,” according to Mr. Rajoy, in part because Mr. Puigdemont is struggling to keep together his fragile separatist coalition.
Hard-line secessionists want an abrupt and unilateral rupture with the central government in Madrid, while conservative and more moderate separatists have become increasingly worried about the consequences of such a move for Catalonia, particularly after hundreds of companies announced plans to relocate their headquarters outside the region.
Mr. Rajoy wrote back to Mr. Puigdemont on Monday and rejected the separatist argument that Catalonia had long been mistreated, as part of a historic conflict between Madrid and Barcelona, Catalonia’s capital.
Mr. Rajoy wrote that the decisions of Mr. Puigdemont’s government had “generated a significant fracture within Catalan society, as well as enormous economic uncertainty,” according to a copy of the letter that was distributed to the news media by his government office.
Earlier on Monday, Ms. Sáenz de Santamaría poured cold water on Mr. Puigdemont’s repeated calls for international mediation in a territorial conflict that Madrid considers to be strictly an issue of domestic sovereignty.
She said that Mr. Rajoy’s government was open to dialogue, but within the Spanish Parliament and only after Mr. Puigdemont acknowledged that the referendum and independence declaration violated the Spanish Constitution.
Mr. Puigdemont’s reply on Monday, she suggested, was intended to help gain the support from the European Union, which separatists have so far failed to obtain. “We have the feeling that Mr. Puigdemont is addressing his letter much more to people outside than to the citizens,” she said.
Last week, Prime Minister Charles Michel of Belgium said in an interview with the Belgian newspaper Le Soir that Europe should recognize the Catalan crisis as a challenge that requires a political dialogue.