Laura Sandys, a Conservative MP in the marginal South Thanet seat which is facing a strong Ukip challenge, tackled Farage over his comments during an event at Chatham House in London, saying she was "absolutely surprised" to hear him allying himself with the Russian leader.
Perhaps surprisingly, Russia is not even a big customer for the City of London's banks and law firms. The UK sold £1.2bn of banking advice and insurance to Russia in 2012: a big number, but only 1% of UK financial service exports, according to analysis by the Open Europe thinktank.
Yanukovych resurfaced in Russia days after leaving Ukraine amid bloody street protests in February against his decision to turn away from a European Union trade deal in favor of closer ties with Moscow.
Gen. Philip Breedlove, head of the U.S. European Command and military chief of NATO, noted the Russians had sufficient forces to move into Moldova. But Obama warned Russia on Wednesday that it faces a united front in the West. 
Crimea is currently separated from the rest of Russia by a strait that links the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov. U.S. officials believe Russia might decide to go into eastern Ukraine to establish a land bridge into the territory by moving toward the Ukrainian cities of Kharkiv, Luhansk and Donetska. 
Russia's takeover of Crimea meant it was imperative for the UK to protect its defence budget, he said, even if that meant other departments suffered.
Since last month pro-Russian protesters have regularly gathered in the city's Lenin Square. Their key demand is federalisation – greater autonomy for the east. Another is that the new government abandons its plan for European integration. "The EU doesn't want Ukraine. And we don't want the EU. We regard the signing of the association agreement as capitulation," an IT programmer, Roman Protsenko, said. Only friendly relations with "brotherly" Russia could bring prosperity, he argued, saying that Russia, Belarus and Ukraine shared history and orthodox religion.
Early presidential elections in Ukraine are scheduled for May 25. Former boxer Vitaliy Klitschko and billionaire businessman Petro Poroshenko are also expected to take part in the elections.
Obama on Thursday praised the loan agreement between the IMF and Ukraine, and said the United States will do its part to help. 
The US has called on Russia to disarm irregular forces in Crimea, admit international observers and pull its troops back from the eastern border. But speaking to Russian state television before the talks, Lavrov laid out Moscow's own quite different terms for a deal. Primarily, he said, Russia was seeking a federal solution for Ukraine as part of "deep constitutional reform".
