"Mr. Putin, in my second term, has had an increasing tendency to view the world through a Cold War prism and to see Russia's interests as invariably in conflict with the West's," he said. 
The B-2 is the US bomber with the ability to be invisible to enemy radar. The four-engine jets can be armed with conventional or nuclear weapons. The US has only 20 of the billion-dollar bombers. The US is the only country with stealth bombers.
JUST WATCHED What Trump has said about North Korea Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH What Trump has said about North Korea 02:05
"The strike was requested by the partnered forces, who had identified the target location as an ISIS fighting position. The target location was actually a forward Syrian Democratic Forces fighting position," the US Central Command said in a statement Thursday.
"There are politicians who are arguing about nuclear sharing with the US, meaning to bring in tactical nukes into the Japanese mainland so we can have some sort of deterrence," Sato said, adding it was considered an option of last resort.
"As long as as we have our very capable Korean People's Army and the leadership of Marshall Kim Jong Un, we don't have any enemy we cannot conquer," she told CNN as she and her classmates were en route to Mount Paektu, the highest point on the Korean Peninsula and a mythological site in North Korea -- claimed as the birthplace of Kim Jong Il.
-- Chinese President Xi Jinping, who is hosting an international financial summit, said in an opening ceremony speech that "incessant conflicts in some parts of the world and hotspot issues are posing challenges to world peace," according to a transcript published by Chinese state media
-- As US President Donald Trump was leaving a church service for Hurricane Harvey victims, he was asked by a reporter if the United States would attack North Korea. "We'll see," Trump responded.
South Korean officials gave a more modest estimate of 50 kilotons.
Nonetheless, in Japan, an alert was issued on television and via cellphones, warning people to take shelter inside a building or underground. Japan said the missile landed in waters about 1,370 miles east of the northern Japanese island of Hokkaido.
