“Everyone knew what was happening here,” he said, gesturing at the concrete extravaganza he helped to build, “but they didn’t say anything because they were doing the same thing, only smaller.”Carles Puigdemont, the head of Catalonia’s pro-sovereignty government, described the raids as a “a co-ordinated police assault” that showed that Madrid “has de facto suspended self-government and applied a de facto state of emergency” in Catalonia.
Tucked in the back corner of a construction site for a new dog shelter in eastern Istanbul lies a freshly dug, unmarked grave – the first in the new “traitors’ cemetery” created specifically to hold the bodies of plotters who died in the 15 July failed coup.
After she saw Yanukovych’s actions, his house, the intervention in Russia, she started to filter the information and became much more careful and sceptical, though she still tends to trust propaganda. But I am working on it! I think the attitudes of many have been shaken. People are less apathetic now. People know that the future depends on every single citizen.
Yanukovych's ouster was followed by the release over the weekend of Tymoshenko, one of his most bitter political foes. She spent 2<U+00BD> years in prison, most of it in a detention hospital.
Ada Colau (@AdaColau) Es un escàndol democràtic que s'escorcolli institucions i es detinguin càrrecs públics per motius polítics. Defensem institucions catalanes
However, his inability to build an international coalition to attack Syria for its use of chemical weapons resulted in criticism that Obama failed to fulfill his earlier threat to act.
No one calls for a U.S. military response in Ukraine, and polls show strong public opposition to the United States assuming the role of global policeman by taking the lead in international conflicts.
"The situation is highly complicated and sensitive, affecting both regional and entire global situations," said the statement attributed to Xi. "I believe Russia can coordinate with all sides, use political means to resolve the issue, and maintain peace and stability for the region and the world. China supports conciliatory measures from the international community that help mitigate the situation."
For a short while, one group of protesting men — cleareyed and sober, but projecting toughness — deliberately defended the police. When there was a briefly chaotic rush for the building’s side door, and a much smaller police contingent blocking it, these men, seeming to take instructions by cellphone, intervened. They ordered the crowd back to the front steps.
