Prof B S Sathyaprakash, from Cardiff University’s school of physics and astronomy, said: “The shock would have released more energy than the light from all the stars in the universe for that brief instant. The fusion of two black holes which created this event had been predicted but never observed.”
Again, this is perhaps especially true when you think that the waves were expected. A “null result” would have been amazingly interesting, and also quite hard to believe. The obvious explanation would be that the experiment just wasn’t working properly, did not in fact have the claimed sensitivity. So preparing the defence against that criticism was a major concern, involving the injection of fake data, lots of double-blind internal secrecy and so on, to make sure that if these ripples were there, LIGO would indeed see them. They were there, and it has seen them. The data, the same wave pattern seen in two detectors, are stunning and totally convincing.
Gravitational waves: 'we can hear the universe' – live Read more
“For me the most exciting thing is we will literally be able to see the big bang. Using electromagnetic waves we cannot see further back than 400,000 years after the big bang. The early universe was opaque to light. It is not opaque to gravitational waves. It is completely transparent.
Then there is the experiment. As gravitational waves pass through the Earth (and now we know for sure they must be doing this all the time) they distort distances, compressing them in one direction while stretching them in the perpendicular direction. The experiment measures the ratio of these distances, down to a precision of thousandths of the size of a proton. This achievement, and the scientific discipline required to make sure you are not fooling yourself, is daunting.
Thursday’s announcement was the unequivocal first detection ever of gravity waves. The hope is that gravity wave astronomy could start to answer questions not just about the life of stars but their deaths as well: death by collision, death in a black hole, death in some rare stellar catastrophe so fierce that, for a few thousandths of a second, the blast is the brightest thing in the universe.
The finding completed the scientific arc of prediction, discovery and confirmation: first they calculated what they should be able to detect, then decided what the evidence should look like, and then devised the experiment that clinched the matter. Which is why on Thursday scientists around the world were able to hail the announcement as yet another confirmation of their “standard model” of the cosmos, and the beginning of a new era of discovery.
So, space is like the ocean and all the planets, stars and galaxies are like boats and objects sitting on its surface. Even though we can’t feel it, there are waves in space that make the Earth bob every so slightly. Those waves are caused by gravity.
Still don’t understand the groundbreaking discovery? We asked scientists to break it down so that even a five-year-old could understand
There was this pretty clever guy 100 years ago who said this is happening all the time. But we didn’t know for sure until we finally managed to build a machine – like a giant ear – so we could to listen to it.
