"It's hard to say exactly where you are once you enter the ferry, since it is completely dark and you basically have to feel your way around based only on the blueprint of the ferry," diving team leader Hwang Dae Sik said. "So it is hard to say definitively in what compartment you are searching and what your are discovering."

Park is facing charges including negligence and causing injuries leading to deaths, said Yang Joong-jin, a maritime police spokesman. 
Jindo VTS: "The captain should make (the) decision to make people escape. We do not know the situation so captain make final decision on passengers' escape."
A South Korean prosecutor said Lee wasn't at the helm of the Sewol when it started to sink; a third mate was at the helm.
Lee has been charged with abandoning his boat, negligence, causing bodily injury, not seeking rescue from other ships, and violating "seamen's law," state media reported, citing prosecutors and police
Commander Benitez, who was hoping to save the Cochino, crossed the plank to safety only when the men on the other vessel yelled that his sub was sinking fast. This sense of a captain’s duty was also part of the narrative in the crash of US Airways Flight 1549, which was forced to ditch in the Hudson River after losing power in both engines after it struck birds. After landing the plane on the water, Capt. Chesley B. Sullenberger III twice checked the sinking cabin to make sure no one was left before leaving himself.
And sometimes the heroes are fellow passengers.
In 1991, a 500-foot-long Greek-owned cruise ship called the Oceanos flooded off the coast of South Africa in 30-foot swells after an engine explosion. Instead of evacuating the 571 people on board, the captain and his crew left, claiming later that they went to seek help.
According to news reports at the time, entertainers on board to perform and the cruise director coordinated the rescue effort. They said they were among the last people to leave the ship, along with members of the South African Navy who were dropped aboard to search for any stragglers.
