
UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres, who said he was following the situation in Syria "with grave concern," urged restraint and called for the Security Council to unite and exercise its "responsibility for international peace and security."
At Diyarbakir, another Turkish base, the Air Force has been staging small numbers of American troops to recover any downed pilots or flight crews.Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Buildings near the site had not been damaged by recent air strikes, directly contradicting Russia’s claims that a jihadist weapons depot had been hit, causing a release of sarin claimed to have been stored there. The Guardian inspected all surrounding commercial buildings. All contained small stores of agricultural goods; none of the sites had been contaminated.
Russia’s foreign minister said no Russian service personnel were hurt in the strike. Speaking during a trip to Uzbekistan, Sergei Lavrov said the strike was launched on an “absolutely made-up pretext”, adding: “It reminds me of the situation in 2003 when the United States and Britain, along with some of their allies, attacked Iraq.”
As a candidate, Mr. Trump said that forcing Mr. Assad out of power was not as urgent a priority for the United States as vanquishing the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. He claimed, somewhat erroneously, that he had always opposed the Iraq war. He criticized Mr. Obama and Hillary Clinton, the former secretary of state who was Mr. Trump’s opponent in the election, as plunging heedlessly into foreign entanglements, drawn by misplaced idealism and the substitution of other nations’ interests for America’s.
Tillerson alluded to US intelligence, which Trump has in the past publicly distrusted, leaving no doubt of Assad’s culpability for a sarin gas attack in Idlib that killed more than 80 people, including children.
Takaaki Uesugi, a security guard at the town hall of Erimo, on the southern tip of Hokkaido, said he first heard about the launch from an alert on his phone.
