In Gelsenkirchen, western Germany, about 150 supporters of the Turkish president attacked a youth centre with ties to Gülen’s Hizmet movement, smashing two windows. None of the people inside the building were injured.
It is not the first time Erdoğan supporters in the Netherlands have been accused of intimidating fellow emigrants who speak out against the president. Earlier this year the Turkish consulate in Rotterdam sent out a circular ordering its nationals to pass on details of anyone who had insulted Erdoğan on social media, though it later retracted the letter, claiming it had been badly worded.
Oktay Yaman (@JournalistYaman) Angriff auf ein Bildungsinstitut der Hizmet-Bewegung in Gelsenkirchen-Hassel
Over the weekend, cities in Germany, Austria, the Netherlands and Belgium saw large-scale, mainly peaceful pro-Erdoğan demonstrations outside Turkish embassies and consulates. But a number of violent incidents have laid bare the level of acrimony between supporters and critics of the Turkish president.
That same battle added a word to the English language: It was called the Battle of Balaclava.
The catch is, staying in the EEA means Britain would have to keep free movement of labor -- so immigration wouldn't change at all.
In Crimea, by contrast, the shadowy Russian troops are equipped with the latest gear – they are professionals, not amateur homegrown revolutionaries. Ukrainian officials point to the GRU, Russian military intelligence. And the warp-speed tempo of events in Crimea is being dictated from the top, not the bottom – from Moscow, rather than the street.
Some 300 people gather in Istanbul's Taksim Square, some waving Turkish flags. Army tanks and a military vehicle sit at the square.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest People beat a soldier on the ground after taking over a military position on the Bosphorus bridge in Istanbul during the failed coup. Photograph: Selcuk Samiloglu/AFP/Getty Images
All this might be a sign not of power, but of weakness. Erdoğan has survived a coup, but that it was even attempted means that Turkey has not, contrary to what some had assumed, moved on from the era of military intervention. Most soldiers stayed loyal, but more than 100 generals and admirals have since been detained – almost a third of the general corps. Many in the armed forces clearly still harbour doubts about Erdoğan, who has sought to undermine secular and military influence since gaining power in 2003. Had they executed their coup more efficiently, Erdoğan might now be dead or detained.
