U.S. Ambassador Samantha Power said Russia's claims about the situation in Ukraine are untrue and warned that sending military forces "could be devastating."
Volodymyr Hrysiv, 36, an unemployed martial arts instructor from Kiev, said he had been part of the protests from the very beginning and had booed Mr. Turchynov.
Still, there may be a net loss of credibility, perhaps a serious one, when the world is uncertain where American self-interest lies. For instance, how dedicated is the United States to protecting various disputed small Asian islands from Chinese domination or conquest? How much does America care about the de facto independence of Taiwan these days, or about limiting China’s influence in the South China Sea? The answers may not be obvious, especially in a diverse democracy like ours.
The protesters want to see a change in the government's overall power structure. They feel that too much power rests with Yanukovych and not enough with parliament. 
This, he said, "is a time for very calm, wise leadership on the Russian side, on everyone's side here."
The vice president's visit comes two days before European Union leaders will meet in Brussels for talks certain to include the Ukraine crisis.
As the new government in Kiev appears committed to a close association with the EU and as Putin had lost indirect means of control, he decided to use armed force to win Ukraine back -- or at least to deny the West what he sees, in his terms, as the West's victory.
After she saw Yanukovych’s actions, his house, the intervention in Russia, she started to filter the information and became much more careful and sceptical, though she still tends to trust propaganda. But I am working on it! I think the attitudes of many have been shaken. People are less apathetic now. People know that the future depends on every single citizen.
But it won't be an end to the pro-Russian fervor in Donetsk. Police were poised for more of the same with another major rally planned on Sunday in a show of support for the referendum in Crimea.
The State Department warned U.S. citizens Friday night to avoid non-essential travel to Ukraine, particularly to the Crimean Peninsula, citing instability.  
