As opinion polls on the referendum result fluctuate, I want to offer a clear set of facts, based on my six decades of experience in financial markets, to help voters understand the very real consequences of a vote to leave the EU.
Too many believe that a vote to leave the EU will have no effect on their personal financial position. This is wishful thinking. It would have at least one very clear and immediate effect that will touch every household: the value of the pound would decline precipitously. It would also have an immediate and dramatic impact on financial markets, investment, prices and jobs.
'Brexit would trigger sterling fall worse than Black Wednesday' Read more
The fund’s latest comments on a possible Brexit echoed the Bank of England’s warning on Thursday that leaving the EU would risk pushing the pound sharply lower and sending shockwaves through the global economy.Those on the receiving end of Euroskeptic coverage include President Obama, who, during a recent visit here, supported continued British membership of the bloc and said there would be no quick free trade deal with the United States if Britain quit.
“They are comfortably the most partisan participant in the debate, and anyone thinking that they are a vehicle for explaining the pros and cons of being in Europe would be under a complete misconception,” he added.
EU leaders are worried that if Britain decides to leave, other countries could follow. That could lead to a gradual unraveling of the EU, with huge consequences for the global economy, security and stability.
Brexit-supporting Conservative politicians warned that Osborne’s credibility would be damaged and that he and David Cameron could be toppled from their positions in the party.
The Daily Mail was not impressed and so turned to a subject that still preoccupies parts of the British press: World War II.
£15bn of tax rises, comprising a 2p rise in the basic rate of income tax to 22%, a 3p rise in the higher rate to 43% plus a 5% rise in the inheritance tax rate to 45p
