The phenomenon detected was the collision of two black holes. Using the world’s most sophisticated detector, the scientists listened for 20 thousandths of a second as the two giant black holes, one 35 times the mass of the sun, the other slightly smaller, circled around each other.
Gravitational waves: 'we can hear the universe' – live Read more
The detector was switched off in January for a further upgrade: astronomers still have to decipher months of material collected in the interval. But – given half a century of frustration in the search for gravitational waves – what they found exceeded expectation: suddenly, in the mutual collapse of two black holes, they could eavesdrop on the violence of the universe.
Thursday’s announcement was the unequivocal first detection ever of gravity waves. The hope is that gravity wave astronomy could start to answer questions not just about the life of stars but their deaths as well: death by collision, death in a black hole, death in some rare stellar catastrophe so fierce that, for a few thousandths of a second, the blast is the brightest thing in the universe.
Unequivocal
At the beginning of the signal, their calculations told them how stars perish: the two objects had begun by circling each other 30 times a second. By the end of the 20 millisecond snatch of data, the two had accelerated to 250 times a second before the final collision and a dark, violent merger.
Baker agrees. “Capturing these general relativistic effects is important because as our telescope technology is improves, so does the accuracy of our astronomical data. They may be only small corrections to the Newtonian predictions, but we should include them to make totally rigorous calculations for the next generation of telescopes.” She adds: “Also they have a bearing on ruling out models of dark matter and dark energy, arguably the biggest problems in current cosmology.”Einstein would be surprised
Still don’t understand the groundbreaking discovery? We asked scientists to break it down so that even a five-year-old could understand
"He thought gravitational waves are a beautiful construct, but they are so small nobody would ever be able to actually measure it," said Marka.