But Mr. Simeoni, at the rally here this week, was careful to pay tribute to the militants who sustained the movement for years, implicitly saluting those who planted the bombs and blew up the villas of the “continentals.”
Carles Puigdemont addresses supporters at a campaign event on December 4.
After police cleared most of Hong Kong’s pro-democracy protesters on Thursday, after more than two months of occupation, their thoughts are turning to what lies ahead. Realising that their involvement may have made them likely targets, some young demonstrators are growing nervous about their future.
Barcelona, Spain (CNN) In an apartment off Barcelona's Passeig de Gracia shopping avenue, Rosario Caceres debated with her grandson over Catalonia's bid for independence from Spain.
The high court last week issued arrest warrants on charges of rebellion and sedition for Puigdemont, who flew to Brussels after being deposed, and four other former government members who went with him.
This election was triggered by the Madrid government after it enacted article 155 of the Spanish constitution in October – an unprecedented move that led to the formal suspension of the region’s autonomy. Spain’s prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, hoped this would help him to gain time, while working to dampen secessionist feeling, including by floating ideas about an enhanced version of Catalan autonomy for the future. Now things are set to accelerate again. More, not less, political turmoil could lie ahead.
Sergi Font, a volunteer with the pro-independence organization Òmnium Cultural in Girona, said that Madrid's accusations of brainwashing were completely unfounded.
The Spanish high court has jailed eight former Catalan government members, along with the leaders of the Catalan National Assembly (ANC) and Omnium Cultural, while investigations continue.
Puigdemont’s PDeCAT party has failed to agree on a united ticket to contest the election with another secessionist party, the ERC, denting the pro-independence camp’s hopes of pressing ahead after the election.
Does anyone think that the sacked Catalan government can expect a fair and independent hearing, uninfluenced by political and media pressure? I do not. We will continue to seek the independence of Catalonia, and defend a model of society in which no one is afraid of the power of the state.
