Isabel Martinez says she now feels only Catalan, rather than Catalan and Spanish.
Indeed, Spain’s main opposition Socialist party, which had backed Mr. Rajoy’s stance toward Catalonia, now appears less certain in its support.
Catalan police role
But Mr. Puigdemont wants to keep on board the more moderate representatives of his own party, some of whom have grown wary about recent announcements of a corporate exodus from Catalonia. Ada Colau, the left-wing mayor of Barcelona, also called on Monday on both Mr. Puigdemont and Mr. Rajoy to take a step back rather than escalate the crisis.
Some see the diverse nature of the independence movement as an asset, guarding it against accusations of xenophobia and extremism. “This diversity makes us stronger and makes us better,” said Benet Salellas, a Popular Unity Candidacy lawmaker.
When does an independence movement get to form its own nation? For decades, a set of unstated but well-known rules has supposedly decided that.
Panteleymonov heads the Ukrainian state television company, which runs the First Channel, accused of censorship and biased reporting under the rule of deposed president Viktor Yanukovych. The Svoboda MP and his associates were furious that the channel had transmitted footage from Putin's speech in the Kremlin on Tuesday in which the Russian president announced that Crimea would become part of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Rajoy’s administration is also reliant on the support of lawmakers from Ciudadanos, a party that was initially started in Catalonia in opposition to the separatist movement.
Analysts say Mr. Rajoy had no choice but to toughen his stance. “Whether it’s Rajoy or someone else in charge, nobody can allow separatists to dynamite the rule of law,” said César Díaz-Carrera, a politics professor at the Complutense university in Madrid.
A large number of Ukrainian soldiers have defected or deserted but there are some who say they will fight rather than leave their posts. However, the situation in Sevastopol on Wednesday was further confirmation that few soldiers have any desire to engage in a firefight with the Russians.
