"I feel very proud of this brilliant achievement," the railway work team leader said. "I'm seeing the launch and feel that our military is improving. I feel very proud to be Korean."
JUST WATCHED What Trump has said about North Korea Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH What Trump has said about North Korea 02:05
Speakers said that in a similar demonstration earlier in the day in the regional capital of Simferopol about 5,000 had joined such squads.
After five nuclear tests and two successful launches of intercontinental ballistic missiles, most experts believe the opportunity to prevent North Korea from developing a nuclear weapon that could hit the United States has come and gone.
US President Donald Trump said Tuesday that "the world has received North Korea's latest message loud and clear," adding Pyongyang "has signaled its contempt for its neighbors, for all members of the United Nations, and for minimum standards of acceptable international behavior."
JUST WATCHED South Korea tests its defense capability Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH South Korea tests its defense capability 01:42
Last week, joint US-South Korean military drills kicked off. The annual exercises always infuriate Pyongyang, and some have called for them to be called off or scaled back as a show of good faith that might bring Kim back to the negotiating table.
"I don't know if they fully realize -- if they know what it means," Zaborovska said of the pro-Russia supporters. Many of them were born in the Soviet Union and speak Russian, she said. 
As the effort inside the ship continues, South Korean authorities are pressing a criminal investigation into the sinking. It's resulted in the arrests of the ship's captain and 14 other members, searches of the company that owned the ferry and the home of the man whose family controls it, and a wide-ranging probe into the country's marine industry.
Accounting for nearly 90% of Pyongyang's imports, China is by far North Korea's most important benefactor. US Presidents dating back to the Bush administration have tried to get China to use its economic leverage to rein in its unruly neighbor.
