Senior defense and government officials later said that the exercise was not related to the events in Ukraine, which officials here have watched with growing alarm, but they also said that there was no reason to postpone them either, and the geopolitical message was clear.
Uniformed soldiers block the famous Bosphorus Bridge connecting the European and Asian sides of Istanbul. Cars flow from the European side to the Asian side, but soldiers and military vehicles block the path to the European side.
Video and photos on social media show large crowds marching through the streets, some taunting soldiers as Turkish military fire guns in the air.
Boycott lists are circulating on social media urging people not to buy goods from alleged Gülen sympathisers. “Several companies attached to us have received substantial threats,” said Ahmet Taskan, vice-chairman of Hogiaf, a network for Amsterdam’s Turkish diaspora business community.
JUST WATCHED Turkey has a long history of military coups Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Turkey has a long history of military coups 00:56
The question was how, and on Wednesday he provided a first answer, when Russia’s military put tens of thousands of troops in western Russia on alert at 2 p.m. for an exercise scheduled to last until March 3. The minister of defense, Sergei K. Shoigu, also announced unspecified measures to tighten security at the headquarters of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet on the Crimean Peninsula.
Their appearance – in civilian clothes and with heads covered – elicited howls of protest from members of Greece’s Turkish-speaking Muslim minority who had also gathered for the hearing.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story

According to Beringen’s mayor Maurice Weber, a clash on Saturday night was stopped in part due to 15 female members of the Turkish community forming a human chain to separate the two groups. Weber said no arrests had been made but that police were currently analysing CCTV footage of incidents on Friday and Saturday night.
