The report comes the same month the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed a new round of sanctions on North Korea in response to the testing of two ballistic missiles in July that experts say may be able to reach the United States.
Chung was heckled by victims' relatives and his car was blocked when he visited a shelter on an island near the site of the sinking last week. On Sunday, he gave his reasoning for the resignation to reporters in Seoul.
Here's a look at some of the allegations, according to Amnesty International:
Fearing their ethnic roots will invite discrimination or abuse, many residents with North and South Korean heritage use Japanese names in their daily lives. Even younger Koreans say they have conflicted feeling towards Japan, a country in which they have lived their entire lives.
That, in China’s eyes, would only invite South Korea to take over the North, and put an American ally on China’s border.
It said the trip had shown North Korea was right to have concluded it should deal with the US "by force only, not just talking, and should finally settle accounts with it through an all-out nuclear showdown".
Yasuko Morooka, a visiting researcher at Osaka University of Economics and Law said North Korean schools were bracing for more abuse after Tuesday’s missile launch.
In the early 1990s, North Korea’s announcement to withdraw from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and the International Atomic Energy Agency was a wake-up call. In response, Japan, the United States and South Korea engaged in dialogue with North Korea and agreed to construct two light-water reactors and to provide heavy fuel oil in exchange for freezing and ultimately dismantling its nuclear program. Japan, the United States and South Korea shouldered most of the financial burden, with the cooperation of Europe and other Asian countries.
Officials said on Saturday that divers had reached two large sleeping units in the ferry where many of the lost may lie dead. Large objects that toppled when the vessel tipped over and sank are believed to be keeping divers from reaching bodies in at least one of the two rooms.
Lest we forget, this all started over a move by the now-deposed Ukrainian president, Viktor Yanukovych, who broke his promise to sign a partnership agreement with the European Union in favor of closer ties with Moscow. Ukrainians were enraged, not just because they want more trade with Europe but because they have seen what Western standards can bring to a society.
