While the island of Hong Kong was ceded in perpetuity following the first Opium War, the bulk of Hong Kong's landmass, the Kowloon peninsula and the New Territories, were leased from China. When the New Territories' lease was due to expire, in 1997, it was decided that the former colony would be returned, in its entirety, to China. 
It is hard to foster a sense of togetherness after almost two centuries of being separate. Linguistically -- Cantonese is the common tongue here -- socially and culturally, Hong Kong and the mainland can seem worlds apart.  
While the city enjoys many more legal freedoms than China -- including, crucially, the right to assembly -- this can be a brickbat for pro-Beijing voices. 
Both iPhone and Android users among Hong Kong demonstrations targeted by fake apps that may come from ‘nation-state’ attackers, says Lacoon Mobile Security
"Besides, if tear gas hits the barbecue flame, it could be really dangerous," he says.
"I don't think they would use lethal weapons but nonetheless deploying armored personnel carriers on the streets could frighten the demonstrators (Into leaving)" said Lam. 
All eyes are on Beijing and how it will respond to the growing waves of protests. The central government is in a tricky situation of not being able to be seen as backing down on its stance but at the same time needing to be wary over the use of force and the implications of doing so.
Hong Kong retains a legal system which closely mirrors the British one, another holdover from the colonial era, but one which prizes transparency and due process and is largely welcomed by the populace.
While sitting on an occupied highway on-ramp, a small group of protesters, including Kason, debate whether protesters are getting too relaxed. One, a college student, worries police want protesters to "soften and let their guard down" in order to come in and forcibly evict everyone.
Since then the city has endured a "brain drain" in the 1980s and the early 90s, after Britain and China had agreed the handover of sovereignty, and particularly when the Tiananmen crackdowns in 1989 were fresh in the memories of those Hong Kongers who could find their way out.  
