Turkey was also already struggling to deal with a rise in attacks by Islamic State, whose most recent assault saw dozens killed at the country’s biggest airport. The detention of so many security officials, and an increasing lack of trust between the different institutions within the security apparatus, can once again only make it harder to tackle the Isis threat.
When other groups, like gay and lesbian organizations or labor unions, try to gather in public spaces in central Istanbul, the streets are sealed off. Armored vehicles with water cannons suddenly materialize, as do police officers with tear gas canisters.
What about his ability to deal with other regional and domestic crises?
Since the coup attempt in Turkey on 15 July that left at least 265 people dead and more than 1,000 wounded, tens of thousands of military personnel, judges, prosecutors and civil servants have been detained or suspended from their jobs as part of the investigation into possible plotters. The Turkish government immediately fingered US-based cleric Fethullah Gülen, a long-time ally of Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan now turned foe, as the mastermind of the attempted military takeover.
One of the generals arrested, Gen. Adem Huduti, the commander of Turkey’s Second Army, was leading the fight against Kurdish militants in the southeast, for example, and was also responsible for security at the border with Syria.
But there is no solid evidence that this feeling of togetherness has translated into a significant boost to Erdoğan’s personal popularity. His existing base has been emboldened, gathering in their thousands every day since the coup attempt. “Till our last breath,” said 42-year-old Adem Çankaya as he attended one rally, “we are here for Erdoğan.”
Video and photos on social media show large crowds marching through the streets, some taunting soldiers as Turkish military fire guns in the air.
“He had just signed a contract a few months prior to these bad events,” says Ahmet Yildiz, who, like his wife, works in a factory for the minimum wage. “He had finished his university studies and could not find a job. He was a simple recruit, and he did what his commanders told him. I love my country. My son loves his country.” He adds that he feels uneasy about the nightly “democracy watches” on public squares all over the country, to which the government has been inviting citizens via speeches, text messages and social media day after day.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest The Turkish military helicopter at Alexandroupolis airport. Photograph: Xinhua/Rex/Shutterstock
However, analysts have said that a coalition of several factions in the army is a more likely scenario, underlining that many questions concerning the failed military intervention remain to be answered. But many are concerned about the massive purge launched last week and warn that the right to a fair trial is increasingly in peril as a result.
