“If they have [sarin], it would be in minute quantities, maybe a kilo or so,” said De Bretton Gordon. The high numbers of woman and children among the casualties was not consistent with a military depot, he added.
Russia dismissed the comments, saying, “At this stage, we don’t see a particular need.” Its deputy ambassador, Vladimir Safronkov, went on to scold its drafters for expressing “horror” at the attack: “Have you even checked what you wrote? This draft was prepared in a hasty way.”
Russian officials, citing their own monitoring systems, say a Syrian airstrike around noon on April 4 hit weapons-storage facilities on the eastern outskirts of Khan Sheikhun under the control of insurgents, including a “terrorist warehouse” where they were making “projectiles stuffed with chemical agents” to send to fighters in Iraq. Mr. Putin said Tuesday that insurgents were continuing to build chemical weapons in Syria and planned to blame any future toxic attack on the Syrian government.
While it is impossible to assess the exact amount of chemical agent used immediately, the extent and distribution of the casualties are consistent with the use of hundreds of kilos.
“The conundrum,” said Robert S. Litwak, the director of studies at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, “is that North Korea never acts except under pressure, but pressure never works.”At times, the Trump administration has seemed at a loss for words in responding to fast-moving events. When North Korea launched its missile, Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson issued a statement so cryptic that it left much of Washington confused.
Mr. Trump has never publicly addressed the central conundrum: While he wants North Korea to give up its nuclear weapons, he does not want to open negotiations. That means he will either have to commit to using force or publicly back down by entering into another set of talks — two options his administration has found unpalatable.
The Syrian government has summarily executed 5,000 to 13,000 people in mass hangings in just one of its many prisons since the start of the six-year-old uprising against Mr. Assad, Amnesty International said in a report in February.
Passengers aboard a sinking South Korean ferry faced a terrifying choice as the vessel rolled: obey commands barked over loudspeakers to stay in place, or don life vests and jump into the chilly ocean water.
The regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is supposed to have given up its chemical weapons stockpile, but not everyone is convinced.
