It's another day of fast-moving events in Ukraine, and you're a little fuzzy on the details. So we're here to catch you up. Let's get started.
A lot. To be brief, Ukraine's ousted President sounded pretty defiant talking to reporters from Russia.  He fled Ukraine days ago but insisted that he remained the legitimate elected leader and that he would not give up. In Crimea, a pro-Russian region of southern Ukraine, armed men in military uniforms alarmed  Ukrainian officials by showing up suddenly outside two airports in the region.
Already, even as the government has arrested thousands of soldiers and officers who allegedly took part in the failed coup, there were signs that it was using the moment to widen a crackdown on perceived enemies. Alongside the military, the government also dismissed thousands of judges, who seemingly had no role to play in a military revolt.
Then, around 3:30 a.m., he landed in Istanbul, after a dangerous flight undertaken while the plotters still had fighter jets in the air — the surest sign that the revolt was failing.
Videos and photos posted on social media show crowds marching through the streets -- some marchers facing off against tanks and armored vehicles.
Nigar Goksel, a senior Turkey analyst for the International Crisis Group, said there were two possible directions. “Either Erdogan utilizes this incident to redesign institutions in Ankara to his own benefit,” she said, “or he takes the opportunity with the solidarity that was extended to him by the opposition and different segments of society to reciprocate by investing more genuinely in rule of law and legitimate forms of dissent.”
Turkish state broadcaster TRT says it has been taken over by members of the military who were part of the coup attempt.
Amid fears that the crowds could be riled by live screenings of speeches from Turkey by politicians including Erdoğan, Germany’s constitutional court banned an application for such broadcasts.
READ: Viktor Yanukovych: I'm still Ukraine's President, will fight for its future
This is where most economists say the biggest cost of Brexit could lie. If Britain stays in the EEA, little will change economically. But leaving will create uncertainty and outcomes will depend on what the government can negotiate, they say.
