The promise of an Islamic version of Christian Democracy has proved a big lie. Instead, the country that was once the most stable, reliable and democratic state in the Islamic world seems now to have cast itself as the region's saddest backward-slider -- with its ever more authoritarian leader playing the role of an Islamic Vladimir Putin, or maybe Eva Peron. 
Another Syrian in Istanbul argued that if the coup had succeeded, Syrians would have been kicked out of Turkey. Ahmed, a Syrian who runs a small workshop in Istanbul, envisaged a scenario where a new government would “rebuild Turkey’s relationship with the Syrian regime, and systematically deport Syrians to Syria within two or three years”.
“If Erdoğan leaves, we are screwed,” wrote one Syrian. “Let them get to the squares and support [Erdoğan’s supporters] in maintaining democracy.”
But for some, the anxiety continues. While some want to actively show their support for Erdoğan, others see danger in being associated with any particular political faction. After the Syrian charity Dubarah posted a Facebook message that advised Syrians to stay out of Turkish politics, it sparked a wide range of responses.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Syrians at refugee camp near the Bab al-Salam border crossing on the Turkish-Syrian border. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty Images
Up in Istanbul, Qassoum “felt relieved. All the tension was gone”.
So when the sun rose on Saturday to reveal that Erdoğan remained in charge of the country, many Syrians would have been hugely reassured. Some even joined pro-Erdoğan protests, while a group still stuck inside Syria reportedly gathered at a Turkish border crossing to express their satisfaction.
Others feared what would happen to rebel-held northern Syria. Turkey has all but stopped letting Syrians cross into Turkey itself, but it has long provided support to the communities and rebels suffering on the other side of its southern border.
Syrian refugees experienced a comparable backlash in Egypt in 2013, following the coup that ousted the Muslim Brotherhood, a loose Erdoğan ally. Under the Brotherhood’s rule, Syrians had been given preferential treatment, and were therefore perceived to support the group. So after the Brotherhood’s removal, Syrians were among the victims of the new regime’s crackdown – and on Friday, Syrians feared a similar situation in Turkey.
Syrian refugees suffer backlash in Egypt after Mohamed Morsi's removal Read more
