If found guilty of rebellion, Mr. Puigdemont, Mr. Junqueras and the others could face up to 30 years in prison.
“This is our final stand,” said Leo, an 18-year-old student, wearing a gas mask, goggles and a white towel draped over his neck, who helped build the barricade on the escalator. Like growing numbers of the protesters, he would not give his full name, fearing punishment. “I think the government will ignore us again but that doesn’t mean we shouldn’t try.”
Following the clearance of the Mong Kok thoroughfares, Hong Kong Chief Executive C. Y. Leung urged people to return to the busy commercial precinct to go shopping, RTHK reported.
Since his arrival in Belgium one month ago, Mr. Puigdemont has held a few campaign events, at one point inviting more than 500 Catalan mayors. He is expected to rally 20,000 Catalans in Brussels on Thursday, according to officials.
"The further actions include a possibility of some escalations pointed at government-related buildings or some of the government-related departments."
Mr. Puigdemont said that he and other former cabinet members had traveled to Belgium in late October because they felt they would not receive a fair trial in Spain, but that they were not seeking asylum.
“We were impregnated with that struggle,” Dumé said. That night’s rally at Corte was “a lot of emotion for us,” he said. “It shows that 40 years of struggle were not in vain.”
While more than 100,000 people turned out for rallies at the protests’ peak this autumn, the numbers of demonstrators have sharply dwindled and public support for the movement has waned. Only a few hundred protesters remain at protest sites in the areas Admiralty and Causeway Bay.
Hundreds of pro-democracy protesters confronted Hong Kong police late on Sunday, stepping up their movement for democratic reforms after being camped out on the city’s streets for more than two months.
“It is important that we know that there are certain entities, which may be public or private, that try to interfere in national politics, that try to affect and create unstable situations in Europe,” De Cospedal said at a meeting of EU foreign and defence ministers on Monday.
