However, the long-term corrosive effect of Russia’s use of disinformation to break down trust in western institutions is hard to measure and may be unmeasurable. What is clear is that it is continuing with the active assistance of political movements who trade in disillusion and resentment, and who have found a natural home on the internet.
Europe also stands by Georgia and Moldova, Van Rompuy said, and has brought forward the signing of association documents with them to June, bringing the prospect of closer ties to Europe.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
It's the latest indication of Russia's isolation within the international community over its actions in Ukraine.
But he was quoted by the official newspaper Rossiyskaya Gazeta as saying, “Ukraine for us is an essential part of our cultural space, in which we were brought up and in which we have lived until now.”
"Putin has his second shot at the dacha, and the goal is wide open," said Maik Lvovskiy, an investigative journalist who followed the 2004 paper trail that led all the way from Yalta to Moscow. "If he pursued it before, then I can't see why he wouldn't take it now; there are absolutely no obstacles in his way at all. He can pretty much walk straight through the front door," Lvovskiy said.
But real estate brokers naturally love to spin the news positively, and they argue that the freeze is just temporary. The wealthy in Moscow now see the writing on the wall, the argument goes, and so they will soon start strategizing on ways to relocate their money, and even themselves, to New York.
“The risk was enormous,” said Werner Kogler, a member of the Austrian Parliament and deputy leader of the opposition Green Party. The banks, he said, “always knew if something went wrong the taxpayers would pick up the tab in the end.” He added: “We’re paying now.”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
He did so despite repeated appeals for dialogue and mediation by the Catalan leader, Carles Puigdemont, whose independence drive has been shunned by wary European Union officials.
