
Sturgeon was expected to speak on Friday morning, touching on the possibility of a second Scottish referendum after her country voted to remain in the EU, in contrast to England. Much of London voted convincingly to remain.
Le Pen, who has been calling for a French EU referendum for three years and is expected to comfortably reach the final round of the presidential election in April, had seized on the UK’s EU referendum to bolster her critical stance on the bloc and on Brexit as a new opportunity for the far right to win over new French voters.
Sitting in the dealing room of the currency firm, Cook watched sterling slide after the Newcastle and Sunderland votes came in. He warned there could be a fall of “biblical” proportions if the vote is for Brexit.
“The key thing I’m confident of here is that a material has been deliberately dispersed in order to cause harm. People flying the aircraft wanted to kill other people with poison.”
Many of the victims of the attack appear to have been poisoned as they slept in their beds. “The smell reached us here in the centre; it smelled like rotten food,” the nurse said. “We’ve received victims of chlorine attacks before – this was completely different.
The Syrian American Medical Society said it had treated victims with identical symptoms. “Among the victims of the attack on the town of Khan Sheikhun who were transferred to the Bab Al Hawa hospital … [We] saw eight patients with symptoms – dilated pupils, muscle spasms, involuntary defecation – consistent with exposure to neurotoxic agents such as sarin,” the organisation said.
More than £40m was gambled in the biggest political betting event in British history.
In other parts of Europe the reaction even among Eurosceptics was more measured. Italy’s anti-establishment Five Star Movement, which won a remarkable 25% of the vote in the 2013 national election and this month gained new momentum when its candidates were elected mayors of Rome and Turin, reacted to the Brexit vote with a lengthy critique of Brussels.
Russia has propped up Moldova's breakaway republic of Transnistria, but the country has had mixed relations with Moscow. About 1 million Moldovans work in Russia and half as many work in the EU. "Part of the population is more inclined toward EU, and it considers this to be Russian imperial expansion," said Tatyana Nita, international secretary for Moldova's Social Democratic party. "But others consider Russia to be a superpower that supports Moldova and other former Soviet republics, and that Europe wants to get revenge on Russia through economic ties with other former Soviet republics, like Belarus, Georgia, and Ukraine."