The vote by Iraqi Kurds on their desire for independence, due to take place on Monday, poses real risks in an unstable region. But their case deserves to be heard
With its troubled economy and dearth of democratic institutions, its prospects were already tenuous. Its best hopes lay in its oil reserves and American support, but Turkey has threatened to cut off its oil pipeline, and the relationship with the United States soured after the Kurds rebuffed its entreaties to cancel the vote.
But if anything, the vote, while satisfying the Kurds emotionally, may have set back their national aspirations.Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Rather than negotiate and then seek international recognition, as the United States and others had asked, the Kurds forged ahead with the referendum.
The vote has strengthened Mr Barzani’s position among his people; how much it will achieve for them is less clear. But denying their dream will come at a cost, too. There is still a little room and time for manoeuvre. It should be used, and with the utmost care.The referendum is “not the end itself”, Mr Barzani told the Guardian: the near-certain victory will declare the desire for independence. There is room for negotiation. But Erbil will not go back to the table with a Baghdad that has no incentive to compromise, armed only with vague expressions of international goodwill. The Kurds want a UN-mandated solution, with a clear agenda, putting them on a path to their end goal through measures such as an enforceable deal on sharing oil revenues – as agreed but not maintained after the Iraq war. And their arguments have merit.
The response has been overwhelmingly negative. The rest of Iraq, the US, Iran, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, the UK, the EU and the Arab League all oppose the vote thanks to concerns ranging from Kurdish secessionism within their own borders and the furthering of ethnic divisions to the immense dangers it poses in a perilously unstable region – particularly given that voting covers the disputed territories the Kurds have gained in the fight against Isis. The US and others want the vote postponed, understandably. But “later” is almost as unsatisfactory an answer as “never” to Kurdish leader Masoud Barzani and his supporters – and that too is understandable.
The question now is whether an arid, landlocked proto-state dependent on hostile neighbors can overcome is own shortcomings — and Iraq’s disruptive retaliation — to build a viable path to independence.
ERBIL, Iraq — After a century of yearning, the Kurds of Iraq have managed, at last, to pull off a vote for independence, but not without antagonizing nearly everyone in perhaps the world’s most volatile region.
