Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Adding to the pain for families, police said texts and social media messages claiming to be from missing passengers turned out to be fake. 
His family members -- one son, two daughters and his wife dressed in all-black traditional Korean wear followed the hearse. When they reached the end of the parking lot of the funeral home, they got into the car. The whole walk took less than five minutes before the mourners got in and drove in a line of cars headed to the crematorium. 
The captain was one of at least 174 people rescued soon after the Sewol began to sink, violating an "age-old rule and internationally recognized rule that a captain must stay on the vessel," maritime law attorney Jack Hickey said. 
The effort was still underway in earnest Saturday morning featuring helicopters circling above the water and about 120 vessels --  from large warships to fishing ships to dinghies -- in the water, in addition to the divers under it.
After the Andrea Doria collided with another vessel off Nantucket in 1956, the captain, Piero Calamai, pledged to remain on his own on the listing ship after the passengers were evacuated to try to save it. He agreed to abandon the vessel only when other officers refused to leave without him.
Pupils at the school were sent home early as distraught parents arrived seeking information about their children. Others rushed to ports in the country's south-west after receiving calls from their children confirming they were safe. One pupil said she saw several parents in tears as she left the school. Children who had not joined the trip started crying as news of the accident came through on their mobile phones, reports said.Jindo Vessel Traffic Services Center:  We are reaching out to nearby fishing boats. ...Please approach as quick as possible. Please actively cooperate in rescue operation.  ...Are the passengers able to escape?
The captain has been charged with abandoning his boat, negligence, causing bodily injury, not seeking rescue from other ships and violating "seamen's law," state media reported.
Some of the male students appeared to hide their growing fear with jokes and uneasy laughs. One student said, “We are going to make news with this.” Another said, “This is going to be a lot of fun if we get it onto our Facebook.”
