Barcelona, Spain (CNN) The Spanish government aggressively moved to squash Catalonia's growing independence movement Saturday when Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy announced plans to dissolve the regional government, remove elected leaders as soon as possible and hold new elections.
However, a spokesman for Ukraine's Council of National Security and Defense, Yarema Dukh, told CNN his government estimates 88,000 Russian troops are at the Ukrainian border.
Macron described the two leaders’ conversation as “extremely frank and direct”, saying he had made clear “everything I thought on different subjects”. He said he would be “constantly vigilant” about gay rights in Chechnya, where Russian officials are actively investigating claims of a purge of gay men.
Some opponents raised what they considered a larger and more troubling concern signaled by the Culture Ministry’s effort: that the annexation of Crimea seemed to crystallize the renewed use of ideology and loyalty as the measuring stick for good citizenship, a tool for control that faded with the 1991 demise of the Soviet Union. Mr. Putin himself inveighed against “national traitors” in his speech reclaiming Crimea for Russia.
He left the door open for diplomacy to resolve the situation but said Russia would face increasing isolation and deeper sanctions if it engages in further incursions into Ukraine.
Vladimir Putin is a bigger threat than Isis, John McCain says Read more
As nearly half a million people protested in Barcelona, Catalonia's biggest city, Catalan president Carles Puigdemont denounced Rajoy's decision and said, "The Catalan institutions and the people of Catalonia cannot accept this attack."
The Black Sea peninsula, which has a majority ethnic Russian population, was part of Russia until 1954 and has long historical and cultural ties to the country. 
"If anyone in the Russian leadership thought the world wouldn't care about their actions in Ukraine or that they could drive a wedge between the European Union and the United States, they clearly miscalculated," Obama said. 
The bulk of those who signed the government petition were directors of state-financed cultural institutions — theaters, museums and libraries. Sergei Shub, the director of the Baltic House Theater in St. Petersburg, said in an interview with Novaya Gazeta that he signed without pressure when the Ministry of Culture called. “Of course, I had a feeling that there was this theater behind me, the theater for which I am responsible,” he said. “There is always this feeling that you have your work behind you and people working together with you.”
