Among those who have reported being turned away at the border are a member of the student union at Hong Kong Baptist University, a Lingnan University studentwho was trying to buy books in the Chinese city of Shenzhen and a City University student trying to visit relatives. Eric Tang, 21, a student at Open University of Hong Kong, said he was turned away this month while trying to shop with his girlfriend in Shenzhen.
Tai, the 50-year-old public face of the 18-month-old Occupy Central protest movement, has been a law professor at the University of Hong Kong since the early 1990s. Although his critics paint him as a radical, Tai has mastered a calm, scholarly affect; last April, the South China Morning Post described him as “one of those cuddly professors found on every campus who would talk to anyone interested in their research”. He has reportedly received death threats for his activism. “I used to be just a university academic living in my comfort zone, spending my spare time sending my children to school and going home for dinner,” he told the newspaper in May. “Now my daughter and two sons volunteer for the movement. My wife is Occupy’s campaign manager.”
Despite his age, Wong is known as a political firebrand: ”You have to see every battle as possibly the final battle,” he told CNN recently. “Only then will you have the determination to fight”.
There are a number of potential commercial uses, Mr. Benoliel said. For example, Open Garden’s software could be quite valuable to the makers of mobile phone games, who fear the loss of Internet or cellphone connectivity, even briefly, because of the loss of “monetization events,” like display ads, he said.
As the son of a policeman who has used the same briefcase since his student days, his supporters said he would improve the lot of ordinary people in a city that has one of the world's widest wealth gaps.
The Hong Kong government said Monday that riot police have pulled back from pro-democracy demonstrations around the city that have caused widespread disruption in one of Asia's financial hubs. 
China's massively popular microblogging site, Sina Weibo is being censored at the highest rate this year with "Hong Kong" as the most commonly deleted term, according to Weiboscope, a Hong Kong University effort that monitors deleted posts. About 152 out of 10,000 Weibo posts were blocked, said Fu, who also works on Weiboscope.
The US-based Electronic Frontier Foundation noted the likelihood of anyone involved in the Hong Kong protests getting infected was not high, given iOS devices had to be jailbroken and Android users still had to be tricked into downloading the malicious software, which was not on the official Google Play market and was not spreading on its own.
"It would be a last resort. The images of tanks rolling down the streets of Hong Kong would evoke images of the Tiananmen Square massacre. This would be very bad for the Xi administration." 
• Specific threats to Russia should be "contingent and used for private messaging" while public statements should "stick to generic" point.
