Water temperatures in the area are between 50 and 55 degrees Fahrenheit (about 10 to 13 degrees Celsius), CNN meteorologist Brandon Miller said.
But an exit from the EU would raise questions about the status of roughly 3 million people from other EU states who currently live in the U.K. Campaigners say they would be allowed to stay, but future EU migrants would likely need a visa.
In light of the coup attempt, Erdoğan “can close access to air bases to the US that he couldn’t a week ago”, Harmer said.Police are questioning the boat's captain, and maritime police are investigating safety and rescue conditions aboard the ferry, YTN reported. 
In addition to Iraqi military airfields open to US warplanes, the aircraft carrier USS Dwight D Eisenhower is in the Persian Gulf. But while last month the US briefly had two carriers in the eastern Mediterranean – the Eisenhower, en route to the Middle East, and USS Harry S Truman, which returned to its Norfolk, Virginia, home port on 13 July – it currently has none in the waters nearest to Syria.
In another exchange described by YTN, a father advises his teenager to go outside to reach rescuers.
The Turkish base is also home to A-10s, the most reliable manned aircraft the US possesses for providing air support to ground forces fighting Isis.
Your report on the consequences of a leave vote (Guerilla campaign mooted, 7 June) quotes a pro-European MP saying “We would have to respect the mandate of the referendum”. But it is quite unclear what that mandate might be, as the referendum question does not specify the range of alternatives to full EU membership should the UK vote to leave. Until parliament has determined whether, for example, it wishes the UK to remain in the European Economic Area, it would be inappropriate for David Cameron to formally notify the EU of the UK’s intention to withdraw from the EU. A leave vote would therefore need to be followed by an emergency debate in parliament from Monday 27 June onwards about the UK’s withdrawal options, where the most likely outcome, as you indicate, would be overwhelming support for the UK to remain in EEA, which would of course outrage hard-line Brexiters in the Conservative party.
Peter Boynton, a retired U.S. Coast Guard captain, said the speed with which the ship sank suggested it had sustained "major damage." 
But Dan Kaszeta, a chemical weapons specialist and managing director of Strongpoint Security, told CNN that the Russian version of events was "highly implausible."
