The facility is surrounded by pro-Russian civilians who call themselves a "civil defense group," backed up by masked, armed men in green combat fatigues, presumed to be Russian soldiers. 
The report comes the same month the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed a new round of sanctions on North Korea in response to the testing of two ballistic missiles in July that experts say may be able to reach the United States.
McCain, an Arizona Republican, shot back, calling it a "massive failure of our reading of Putin."
“I think there is a whole generation that has basically not done a good job of going beyond embracing pacifism,” to explain to younger people why it is important, said Sabine Frühstück, professor of modern Japanese cultural studies at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and the author of “Playing War: Children and the Paradoxes of Modern Militarism in Japan.”
Sitting behind the RT anchor desk on Wednesday, Washington-based Liz Wahl told the audience she "could not be part of a network funded by the Russian government that whitewashes the actions of (President Vladimir) Putin," adding "I'm proud to be an American and believe in disseminating the truth, and that is why after this newscast I am resigning."
Rescue officials spoke of a forest of floating objects, doors forced shut by enormous water pressure, and of currents that tug at the breathing tubes that keep them alive as they look for the dead.
Story highlights Tensions are rising on the Korean Peninsula after recent missile tests
In the seaside resort city of Yalta, Alex Shiroki observed a crowd of hundreds gathered Wednesday by a monument to Vladimir Lenin, singing songs and waving flags in support of Russia. He thought the pro-Russian presence would be even bigger. 
Earlier this week, an unnamed European Union official was reported to have told a BBC journalist that his organization may try to expel Russia from the 2014 finals. 
"This time there's nothing to project, they don't care about it. What they do care about is introducing themselves in the Western media world and challenging the established truths and half-truths of the Western media, of the Western World. It's not about Russia."
