The United States has also been conducting joint exercises with Japanese forces for the past two weeks, and it was Japan that seemed most directly affected by Tuesday’s launch.
“It would be a reprisal attack. You won’t find any international law specialists who will find a legal right to carry out a reprisal.”
And it is not easy to square Mr. Trump’s empathy for the victims of a single chemical weapons attack with his refusal to take in thousands of Syrian refugees from years of strife that have turned that country into a charnel house. Relaxing that policy did not come up in the president’s deliberations over striking Syria, his advisers said.
Lt. Gen. Hiroaki Maehara, the commander of the Japan Air Self-Defense Force’s Air Defense Command, said that the armed forces did not try to shoot down the missile from North Korea on Tuesday because they did not detect a threat to Japanese territory.
Minutes after the missile was launched, residents in northern Japan received a text message urging them to seek shelter in a strong structure or a basement.
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe -- who had a 40-minute phone call with Trump on Tuesday -- described the launch as a "reckless act."
Two possibilities are receiving attention: that the agent, sarin, was in stocks Mr. Assad hid from inspectors, or that weapons specialists in the Syrian government manufactured a new supply. While it is not simple to make sarin, it is possible in a small lab that could be easily hidden in a basement, out of sight of inspectors and foreign spy satellites.

At the UN, the US, Britain and France planned to force a security council vote on Thursday evening on a resolution they have drafted condemning the attack. While it does not directly apportion blame, the resolution requires the Syrian military to hand over to UN investigators flight logs for its pilots from 4 April, the day of the attack, as well as the names of helicopter squadron commanders, and provide access to air bases suspected of being the launchpad for the chemical attacks. On Wednesday, Russia signalled it would veto the resolution.
One underlying factor in Syria’s latest attack may have been perceived signals of apathy from Russia and the United States. Russia proposed and participated in the destruction of weapons stocks, but since 2015, Russian officials, who have long supported Mr. Assad, have repeatedly denied or obfuscated evidence of new chemical attacks by the government.
