Advertisement Continue reading the main story
The office of Spain's prosecutor general meanwhile confirmed it would file a lawsuit for rebellion against Puigdemont, the Catalan government and the members of the parliament board who voted in favor of independence.
Using generally stronger and more provocative language than the administration she once represented, Clinton seeks to buff her own foreign policy credentials and those of her party without straying too far from the official government messaging and tactics.
Unlike the Brexit outcome, Catalonia’s referendum will not pass democratic muster. But, like Brexit, the possibilities after secession have barely been mentioned, let alone examined. One word – Yes – seems enough. Welcome to a new land, flowing with milk and honey. But if the European Union is alarmed about Britain leaving, it is still more alarmed – from Belgium to France to Italy – about separatist movements destroying cohesion from within. And about a Spain, 40 years after democracy returned, lurching into unpredictable confrontation as other regions – the Basque country, Galicia – stage their own UDIs. There is still room for negotiation here. Madrid has already offered talks on autonomy issues. If the Catalan government can demonstrate a consistent demand and produce properly monitored plans for an eventual referendum, perhaps with a higher ceiling than 50.1%, then that is an approach that might heal the wounds – division, anger, increasing intimidation – already opening in society. The prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, for his part, should try to move cautiously, always open to compromise and using his Socialist and Ciudadanos allies as honest brokers, along with strong, clear EU intervention.
Indeed, the forcible steps by the central government have now left Catalan civil servants and politicians with the painful choice of sticking to their secessionist plans and defying Madrid’s direct administration or facing the potential of criminal charges.
A banner reading "I just want to vote" is seen as demonstrators gather outside the Catalan high court.
“This election has been called by the Spanish government under Spanish law — and it will be an election run within the state,” Mr. Bel said.
After the referendum, the struggle over Catalonia intensified in an often confusing exchange between the Catalan leader, Carles Puigdemont, and Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of Spain. After weeks of equivocating, Mr. Puigdemont told the Spanish authorities that Catalan lawmakers might vote for independence. That was not good enough for Mr. Rajoy, who announced on Saturday that he would remove Catalonia’s leadership.
Dr Miroslav Baros
“There’s still a 19th- and 20th-century Europe alongside the 21st-century one,” Mr. Niblett said. “We thought Russia could change, was changing. But Putin has taken it in another direction, consolidating power in a crude form.”
