Michael S. Turner, a cosmologist at the University of Chicago, noted that astronomers had once referred to the search for gravitational waves as an experiment, not an observatory. “LIGO has earned its ‘O,’ ” he said. “That is, it will be an observatory, getting tens of events per year.”The Ligo discovery signals a new era in astronomy, he said.
What could be bigger than gravitational waves? Predicted by Einstein, confirmed to exist this week, they are born of black holes colliding and the sound of space time itself warping through the Earth.
Firstly, we have seen ripples in space-time! And the fact that we expected them makes that even more amazing in some ways. The understanding of the fabric of the universe which is contained in Einstein’s general relativity has made yet another valid prediction. In fact, the beautiful elegance of that theory is a little deceptive – actually solving those equations to get a real prediction, which tells you what kind of experiment you need to build to test the prediction, is a major mathematical challenge and a towering achievement in itself.
At the beginning of the signal, their calculations told them how stars perish: the two objects had begun by circling each other 30 times a second. By the end of the 20 millisecond snatch of data, the two had accelerated to 250 times a second before the final collision and a dark, violent merger.
Physicists believe some kind of dark matter exists because astronomers can detect the gravitational pull it exerts on stars and galaxies. But dark matter itself is not only invisible, it has never been detected directly or indirectly by other means. Scientists have suggested that dark matter comprises “weakly interacting massive particles” (Wimps), leftover material from the big bang that pass through normal matter and leave no trace but in gravity.
The gravitational waves -- ripples in space-time -- were created by the merging of two black holes, Reitze said. One black hole had the mass of 29 suns; the other was the equivalent of 36 suns. Each was perhaps 50 kilometers (30 miles) in diameter.
“These are the three guys who did the groundwork, and in the next 25 years developed the stuff, convinced the National Science Foundation to fund them, and pushed it forward,” he said. “It’s difficult, because there are all these other people who have been working on it. I have a very romantic view that these three guys should have it – but it may be unfair.”
Scientists have what they call a "five-sigma" standard of proof, and LIGO's researchers say the gravitational wave discovery exceeds that.
But is LIGO correct? Have we really detected gravitational waves?
