A news conference Friday from his new quarters in southeastern Russia underscored just how dim his prospects appear to be, as the ousted Ukrainian President complained that his host -- and potential benefactor -- was not around and had done little to make his stay more comfortable.
He's on the outside looking in, and the view of Viktor Yanukovych seems to keep getting dimmer.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
My friends started texting me that it might be a coup so we told everyone we neeeded to leave the house. You shouldn’t be in an army house during a coup. We were terrified when my mum called me to leave immediately. There were no taxis or ubers. We hitchhiked to a more crowded non-army place and waited 30 mins for a taxi.
Already, even as the government has arrested thousands of soldiers and officers who allegedly took part in the failed coup, there were signs that it was using the moment to widen a crackdown on perceived enemies. Alongside the military, the government also dismissed thousands of judges, who seemingly had no role to play in a military revolt.
Turkish state broadcaster TRT says it has been taken over by members of the military who were part of the coup attempt.
Celebrations by his supporters continued on Sunday, with jubilant crowds marching through the streets of Istanbul.
Saturday, 2:51 a.m.: The Turkish National Intelligence unit claims the coup is over.
"I consider that Russia must and has to act," Yanukovych told a phalanx of reporters who had assembled in the city of Rostov-on-Don, near the southwestern border with Ukraine and about 700 miles south of Moscow.
He cited Yanukovych's comments as "signs that he is not in good standing with his current host."
