Sergei Glazyev
The mayor of Barcelona, Ada Colau, called the raids “a democratic scandal” and said Catalans would defend their institutions.
Yatsenyuk said the issue was one of global security. He cited the 1994 Budapest Memorandum -- inked by the U.S., UK, Ukraine and Russia -- which guaranteed Ukraine's territorial integrity in return for the dismantling of its massive Soviet-era nuclear arsenal.
Ed Royce, who chairs the committee, and was an the architect of the Iran sanctions push that infuriated the Obama administration, told CNN: “The question is will the White House support something as aggressive as the economic sanctions that we would like to see pushed.”
Before the propaganda campaign, a poll reported in The Washington Post found  a majority of Crimeans were not exactly yearning to join Russia. More than half said their homeland was Crimea, and 35% said Ukraine. About 12 % of Crimeans are Muslim Tatars who despise Russia. About one-quarter are ethnic Ukrainians. You can bet they feel absolutely no affection for Russia today.
“Logically, the state has to react,” he said. “There is no democratic state in the world that would accept what these people are trying to do. They’ve been warned and they know the referendum can’t take place.”
Every time you ask them what they think, you just get a sigh as they say "What can we do?" and talk of perhaps one day leaving to Kiev.
A shift in planning to Siberia, Mr. Karaganov said, “has already been proclaimed, and is happening,” in part to weaken the Western influence on Russia’s elites, who are seen as “too dependent on their holdings in the West.”
Russia so far has refused any direct talks with Ukraine's new leaders, but its foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, has talked daily with Kerry, met face-to-face with him last week in Europe and the diplomats met again for more than five hours Friday in London.
This has played out while thickets of signs declaring “Together with Russia” have sprouted along roadways, urging citizens to vote to leave Ukraine.
