Beijing, however, has repeatedly reinterpreted the document, and in June of this year released a White Paper reaffirming its "complete jurisdiction" over Hong Kong.  
The police generally have the trust of the population -- although how this trust will be affected by the events of the past few days remains to be seen.
"In the mainland, first of all, we would never hear about something like this because of censorship. In the mainland, this protest would be forcibly dispersed within two hours," she said. "Here it's different. I don't think police will open fire because Hong Kong is a safe place."
“Cross-platform attacks that target both iOS [iPhone] and Android devices are rare, and indicate that this may be conducted by a very large organisation or nation state,” Lacoon co-founder Ohad Bobrov said in a blog post. “The fact that this attack is being used against protesters and is being executed by Chinese-speaking attackers suggests it’s first iOS trojan linked to Chinese government cyber activity.”
However the iPhone users among the thousands of protesters should be safe if they have not bypassed Apple’s security system to “jailbreak” their phones to install unapproved apps.
Dubbed Xsser mRAT by Israeli firm Lacoon Mobile Security, the malware is being run from the same server as a malicious program targeting Android phones spotted last week. That masqueraded as an app for the Occupy Central pro-democracy movement and was spread via messages on the cross-platform Whatsapp messaging system which urged readers to “Check out this Android app designed by Code4HK for the coordination of Occupy Central!”. Protest organisers said none of its members had developed or distributed the application.
Demographics are a cause for concern, too. Three-fifths of the population in Hong Kong grew up and went to school while it was governed by Britain. Many resident, as much as a tenth, have sworn loyalty to another government and carry passports from Canada, Australia, the United States and elsewhere, many acquired in the years immediately before Hong Kong’s return to Chinese rule in 1997.
This, ostensibly, yields little wiggle room for a compromise that would allow both sides to walk away from the standoff, say analysts.
C.Y. Leung, the Hong Kong leader whose resignation has become a rallying cry for the protesters that have filled the city's streets this week, was a relative unknown before he took the top job in 2012. 
China itself has labeled the demonstrations "illegal." Some analysts claim the protests have been the most significant since the former colony's handover from Britain to China in 1997.
