He added that he was “thinking hard” about his response, but vowed that Trump would “pay dearly for his speech calling for totally destroying” North Korea.
The report comes the same month the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed a new round of sanctions on North Korea in response to the testing of two ballistic missiles in July that experts say may be able to reach the United States.
5) The Western world turns on the squeeze play:  The White House appears to want a unified effort in which nations all over the globe use their political and economic might to punish Russia and leave the new Ukrainian government triumphant.  Problem is, several big countries seem reluctant to take that course, and unless everyone is on the same page, any sanctions would be weakened.  And even though it was hit hard in 2008 by the recession, Russia is not Syria, Iran, or North Korea.  This is a big nation that is unlikely to buckle quickly to any amount of pressure.
Liberals continue to oppose a military buildup in Japan, but some analysts say younger people don’t understand the dangerous stakes of tilting toward militarism.
"The security situation around our country is getting increasingly severe," Abe said, who was addressing the Japanese parliament's diplomacy and defense committee.
“They represent another stark departure from the Obama administration’s dithering on Syria, which only worsened the bloodshed and created a vacuum for ISIS,” said Representative Ed Royce, Republican of California and the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee, referring to the Islamic State. He said he would push forward with Democrats on legislation that would “give the White House additional leverage to hold Assad — as well as his Russian and Iranian backers — accountable.”
Trump speaks in Sarasota, Florida, after accepting the Statesman of the Year Award at the Sarasota GOP dinner in August 2012. It was shortly before the Republican National Convention in nearby Tampa.
This week, Republicans escalated their calls for the administration to speed those exports.
JUST WATCHED Why does North Korea keep launching ICBMs? Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Why does North Korea keep launching ICBMs? 01:14
Ukraine's sports minister has already announced a personal boycott and as the tense diplomatic and military standoff continues with Russia, it's possible the whole team could follow suit.
