The gravitational waves -- ripples in space-time -- were created by the merging of two black holes, Reitze said. One black hole had the mass of 29 suns; the other was the equivalent of 36 suns. Each was perhaps 50 kilometers (30 miles) in diameter.
“You’ve got to keep control of 10 tons of liquid xenon a mile underground, knowing that you can’t afford to lose it because it’s very expensive, and that much cryogenic gas could be potentially be very dangerous. So you have a zero failure requirement.”
Astronomers have already exploited visible light, the infrared and ultraviolet, radio waves, x-rays and even gamma-rays in their attempt to understand the mechanics of stars, the evolution of the galaxies and the expansion of the universe from an initial big bang 13.8bn years ago.
He and his colleagues at an experiment in China, the Daya Bay Collaboration, found an extraordinary excess of antineutrinos there, in line with two other experiments. They published their results on Saturday in the journal Physical Review Letters.
Prof B S Sathyaprakash, from Cardiff University’s school of physics and astronomy, said: “The shock would have released more energy than the light from all the stars in the universe for that brief instant. The fusion of two black holes which created this event had been predicted but never observed.”
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Ligo co-founder Rainer Weiss, left, and Kip Thorne, right, hug on stage during a news conference at the National Press Club in Washington. Photograph: Andrew Harnik/AP
A Quixotic Project
Firstly, we have seen ripples in space-time! And the fact that we expected them makes that even more amazing in some ways. The understanding of the fabric of the universe which is contained in Einstein’s general relativity has made yet another valid prediction. In fact, the beautiful elegance of that theory is a little deceptive – actually solving those equations to get a real prediction, which tells you what kind of experiment you need to build to test the prediction, is a major mathematical challenge and a towering achievement in itself.
If you didn’t fully grasp Thursday’s blockbuster announcement that scientists had detected gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric of spacetime that were first anticipated by Albert Einstein a century ago, you were not alone.
Dr. Weiss tried to mount a similar effort at M.I.T., also using the laser approach, but at the time, black holes were not in fashion there. (Things are better now, he said.)
