Although regional institutions were suspended from 1938 to 1977, Catalan bourgeois elites have displayed remarkable survival instincts, entering into alliances with the forces of the Spanish right whenever they deemed it necessary to maintain order. Catalan conservative nationalists have ruled the region for more than three decades in the democratic period. These same nationalists have voted in favour of about half of the national budgets during this period. If changes are to be made in Spain’s federal structure, they shouldn’t be based upon the false assumption that Catalonia has had no role in national politics.
But the Umbrella Movement did not only mobilize youth who had previously kept out of politics. The long standoff also garnered an audience for more truculent groups, including raucous online communities, who argued that escalating confrontation with the authorities was the only way to break the will of the government and win concessions.
Satirical article saying Spanish riot police took cocaine lands editor in court Read more
At the same time, the street protests may have had the unintended effect of increasing the job security of the very person whose resignation the demonstrators called for repeatedly: Hong Kong’s chief executive, Leung Chun-ying.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Catalan nationalism has featured clear appeals to ethnicity, and any reader can search on the internet for dog-whistle or outright supremacist statements. Common messages have included “Spain steals from us”, “Subsidised Spain lives off productive Catalonia”, or posters showing ragged kids from southern Spain living off the taxes paid by the Catalan middle class.
Late in the evening, hundreds of police officers and demonstrators faced off on Sai Yeung Choi Street, just one block east of Nathan Road, which had been closed to traffic almost continuously for the past two months as protesters settled in a tent city.
The Hong Kong government and the police have come under criticism for moving slowly to prosecute the officers. The police statement issued Wednesday said there had been no delay. “Police reiterate that if any Force member commits illegal acts, Police will handle this seriously and investigation will be conducted in a fair and impartial manner,” the statement said.
The move to arrest the officers came after the police successfully cleared one of Hong Kong’s busiest shopping streets of encamped protesters on Wednesday. But only hours later, demonstrators gathered again in the Mong Kok neighborhood, only a short distance away from the original encampment on Nathan Road.
