Former Ukrainian Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko said that if diplomacy fails to persuade Moscow to withdraw its forces from the Ukrainian region of Crimea, the world should apply the "strongest means" on Russia.
Advantage Moscow, it would seem.
"It is not a Russia or the United States or other choices," he said. "This is about people of Ukraine and Ukrainians making their choice about their future. And we want to work with Russia, with other countries, with everybody available to make sure this is peaceful from this day forward."
Vitaly Churkin, Russia's ambassador to the United Nations, rejected Ukraine's calls to stop Russian intervention. "We can't  agree with this at all," he said.
Hawkish U.S. politicians want a more robust response by the Obama administration to the Russian aggression, calling for tough economic sanctions and reviving plans to build a missile-defense shield in Poland that Putin opposed.
"The Russians have stated that they are intending military exercises," she said. "Obviously, given their past practice and the gap between what they have said and what they have done, we are watching it with skepticism."
Before arriving in The Hague, David Cameron has said that Britain and its Nato allies would help bolster the defences of the alliance's Baltic members, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, who have Russian minorities and which fear destabilisation by Moscow.
One possible move, hinted at by Kerry, would be to kick Russia out of the G8 group of industrial powers that also includes the United States, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and Canada. Those nations already are skipping a preparatory meeting for the next G8 summit set to be hosted by Putin in June in Sochi.
The United States also will train observers for the May 25 elections, and is sending a team of experts to help identify stolen assets and support anti-corruption measures.
Russia's defense minister assured U.S. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel in phone call Thursday that Russian troops on the Ukraine border do not intend to cross the border or take aggressive action, Pentagon spokesman Rear Adm. John Kirby said.
