"I can't imagine Spain without Catalonia and Catalonia without Spain. I don't want to see it," he said at a recent press conference in Prague, according to Bloomberg
With the emergency measures taken over the weekend, Mr. Rajoy opted not to appoint a caretaker leader of Catalonia.
Other Catalan politicians were similarly defiant. Catalan parliamentary leader Carme Forcadell accused Rajoy of "enormous political irresponsibility" that "trespassed all limits."
Russian officials have repeatedly claimed that the new interim government in Kiev is run by radicals and "neo-Nazis", and the actions by the Svoboda MP will play into their hands.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
“Despite everything that has happened, our offer of dialogue is sincere,” Puigdemont added.
In response, Carles Puigdemont, the leader of Catalonia, told Catalan television that no politician or court in Madrid could stop the referendum.
Mr. Zoido called on separatist leaders to remove their personal belongings from their offices on Monday and to leave, focusing solely on preparing for the December elections, as candidates.
"This assault on freedom of expression must be immediately investigated and those responsible must be prosecuted. Anything less will only open the door to further attacks against media professionals and activists," said Heather McGill, Ukraine researcher at Amnesty International.
Will our troops try to liberate Crimea from Russian invaders? Will Russian troops try to invade eastern regions of Ukraine where Russian provocateurs have been trying to cause trouble, too? Did Putin set his goals not just for Crimea but the whole of Ukraine? Putin keeps talking about Ukraine as a failed state and the Ukrainian government as not legitimate, though it's recognized by all other countries in the world. 
