Will Hong Kong get democracy?
Despite his ardour and bluntness he is not a rabble-rouser. “He’s passionate but measured; measured beyond his years,” said Michael Vidler, the human rights lawyer who acted for Wong following his detention.
"It invigorates the viewers to interact with the work," said Haines, the executive director of FOR-SITE, a foundation which organized the exhibit. They also brought wifi to Alcatraz for the first time so visitors could send Instagrams and Tweets from the island.
“Press freedom in Hong Kong is not in a good state – it’s not an authoritarian regime yet, but the pressure is on,” said Mark Simon, a senior executive at Next Media, the city’s only openly pro-democratic media conglomerate. “What’s saving the city now are these group acts of journalistic courage.”
Hong Kong, a former British colony of 7 million people, has been governed under a “one country, two systems” framework since it was handed back to Chinese control in 1997. The principle is simple in theory — Beijing is responsible for the city’s defence and foreign affairs; Hong Kong enjoys limited self-governance and civil liberties, including an independent judiciary and unrestricted press.
Several of the young people occupying the business district told CNN they were going to stay overnight. 
Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk called the annexation "a robbery on an international scale," one that his nation will never accept. 
“It was entered solely to ensure CY Leung did not move to a competitor or set up or promote any business in competition with DTZ, or poach any people from DTZ, and hence to ensure the business retained its value after UGL acquisition,” UGL said.There are some who fear that clampdowns on civil liberties might mean the city could soon face another exodus: "I'm worried that people might migrate again," Michael Davis, a law professor at Hong Kong University, told CNN's Andrew Stevens.. "That would be a disaster."
When relevant results appeared on the Chinese search engines, the articles contained a distinctively pro-China slant and even surfaced a month-old article about a small pro-Beijing counter-protest in Hong Kong. 
