Accelerating missile program
Latest developments:
"For months North Korea refrained from conducting a nuclear test and from launching missiles over Japan," said David Wright, the co-director of the Union of Concerned Scientists Global Security Program. "It now seems to have decided to end that restraint."
On social media, one Twitter user described “a red pillar of fire” falling from the sky toward Hokkaido. “The only thing I can do is self-defense in this world,” he wrote. “It’s important to be ready. We cannot deny that World War III might be close.”
And Sunday’s test was the most powerful yet, with a blast that experts said was far more destructive than the bombs that the United States dropped on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki during World War II.
People are tying ribbons to their homes and schools across the country. The ribbons prominently appear on television news programs nearly every half hour, somber music sometimes playing underneath the slow-motion images of the yellow across the country. The prim presenters of South Korea's television programs, whose female anchors tend to favor hot pink and royal blue, are all wearing grey and black suits. One story dominates the news channels -- the Sewol ferry disaster, from the investigation to the national mourning. 
-- US Defense Secretary James Mattis told reporters in front of the White House that any threat to the United States, its allies or its territories "will be met with a massive military response, a response both effective and overwhelming." He added: "Kim Jong Un should take heed of the United Nations Security Council's unified voice. All members unanimously agreed on the threat North Korea poses and they remain unanimous in their commitment to the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula ... We are not looking to the total annihilation of a country, namely North Korea, but as I said, we have many options to do so."
Duk-Ha was one of 325 students from Danwon High School who boarded the ferry bound for Jeju. Only 78 returned. 
When divers found the teenager's body in the submerged ship, he was wearing a pair of jeans and a light green hoodie.
The troops taking over or surrounding key strategic positions in the Crimea are in uniform but have had badges or other forms of identification removed. But some of them have confirmed to reporters they are Russian marines from Sevastopol. Trucks and armed vehicles have had their number plates disguised too, but some of the coverings have fallen off, revealing them to from the Russian army.
