"We're all shocked. As I've read in Hong Kong media, those adults -- would they let their own children lie on the streets? What are they doing after receiving illegal funding? These are the questions posed by Hong Kong people online that I've read."
"Occupy Central has formally begun," said a statement by the group. "The two nights of occupation of Civic Square in Admiralty have completely embodied the awakening of Hong Kong people's desire to decide their own lives.
On Tuesday, words such as “Hong Kong,” “barricades” and “Occupy Central,” the putative name for the civil disobedience campaign, were either blocked or yielded few results on weibo. Sina had also neutralized the word “umbrella.”
Other countries for which Britain has licensed the sale of teargas produced by British companies include the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Oman, Jordan and Pakistan.Here's the rationalization for Putin's decision, and the reasoning for the West's derision. 
Video
Vladimir Putin's gala address before Russian parliamentarians and officials Tuesday surprised no one when he announced Russia's annexation of Crimea. The interesting part was his distorted view of Russian history, and his proclamation that a bizarre kind of simultaneously aggrieved and aggressive hyper-nationalism is now Russia's official ideology. 
The official Xinhua news agency has said that its decision on electoral reform carries "unshakeable" legal status and force, angering protesters who are opposed to Beijing retaining the ability veto candidates. 
“What Hong Kong people did before the handover does not matter,” he said. “This is the first chance I have to express my demand for democracy. What we want is very simple. We want to choose our own leader.”The city's Basic Law or "mini-constitution" has allowed the city to carry on with its own legal and financial system and Hong Kong enjoys civil liberties unseen in mainland China such as an independent judiciary, freedom of the press and the right to protest.
