Brexiters seem to recognise that a sharp devaluation would be almost inevitable after Brexit, but argue that this would be healthy, despite the big losses of purchasing power for British households. In 1992 the devaluation actually proved very helpful to the British economy, and subsequently I was even praised for my role in helping to bring it about.
It is reasonable to assume, given the expectations implied by the market pricing at present, that after a Brexit vote the pound would fall by at least 15% and possibly more than 20%, from its present level of $1.46 to below $1.15 (which would be between 25% and 30% below its pre-referendum trading range of $1.50 to $1.60). If sterling fell to this level, then ironically one pound would be worth about one euro – a method of “joining the euro” that nobody in Britain would want.
Households would lose between £3,000 and £5,000 a year on average
As opinion polls on the referendum result fluctuate, I want to offer a clear set of facts, based on my six decades of experience in financial markets, to help voters understand the very real consequences of a vote to leave the EU.
Those on the receiving end of Euroskeptic coverage include President Obama, who, during a recent visit here, supported continued British membership of the bloc and said there would be no quick free trade deal with the United States if Britain quit.
“They are comfortably the most partisan participant in the debate, and anyone thinking that they are a vehicle for explaining the pros and cons of being in Europe would be under a complete misconception,” he added.
It would be reasonable to assume that ethnic minorities would be turned off by the fear-mongering and xenophobia directed towards eastern European migrants, most crudely put in last week’s “Breaking point” Ukip poster. Indians, Pakistanis and Jamaicans have been subject to similar vilification in previous decades but surprisingly, in the lead-up to the referendum I’ve heard more and more examples of first- and second-generation non-EU immigrants warming to stricter rules on EU migration.
'Brexit would trigger sterling fall worse than Black Wednesday' Read more
EU leaders are worried that if Britain decides to leave, other countries could follow. That could lead to a gradual unraveling of the EU, with huge consequences for the global economy, security and stability.
Brexit-supporting Conservative politicians warned that Osborne’s credibility would be damaged and that he and David Cameron could be toppled from their positions in the party.
