Shortly after news of the uprising broke on Friday night, Turkey’s opposition parties issued statements condemning the military’s violent intervention and professing their support of the elected government. Social media sites, if throttled, were awash with people opposing the coup attempt, and despite a curfew declared by the military, tens of thousands took to the streets in Turkish cities.
Earlier this month Michael Gove and Boris Johnson said that following Brexit and the end of free movement, “We could then create fairness between EU citizens and others, including those from Commonwealth countries”, adding that they will “end discrimination against non-EU countries”.
Perhaps it’s the desire to integrate and feel “British” – after all, what’s more British these days than saying you’re worried about immigrants? Whatever it is, I hope that voters from all backgrounds remember that, although immigration has become the biggest issue regarding our EU membership, history shows us that migrants have always been scapegoats for the failings of our politicians, and the only thing that has changed is the groups who have been labelled as the problem.I, however, don’t believe what I have read about EU migrants because I have my own experience to go on. When I was in sixth form I worked evenings as a waitress at the Cambridge colleges. I served dinner to students who looked like Boris Johnson dressed in Harry Potter capes. The catering staff I worked with were mostly Europeans, from Poland, Spain, Lithuania and France. It was definitely a union of Europeans who kept the kitchens running.
But those campaigning to stay in the bloc can count on much more sympathetic treatment from several other newspapers, including The Financial Times and The Guardian, and the left-leaning tabloid The Daily Mirror.
“The Telegraph, Mail and Express have published a string of stories on migration, terrorism, crime and control of our borders that contain factual inaccuracies and/or distortions,” it said, announcing plans to complain to the country’s press regulator, the Independent Press Standards Organization, about eight articles.
Market watchers said the mood changed after a string of results from the north-east, Midlands and Wales pointed to a close result and possible Brexit win.
Results from across the country suggesting the Brexit camp were on the brink of declaring a referendum victory saw sterling down 10% against the dollar
Those of us with migrant parents are familiar with this experience. So why is it that some of us feel threatened?
“They are comfortably the most partisan participant in the debate, and anyone thinking that they are a vehicle for explaining the pros and cons of being in Europe would be under a complete misconception,” he added.
