Asked who wields real influence over Russia's impending decision on whether to accept Crimea, Minchenko said "only one person, [Vladimir] Putin, is making the decision on Crimea, and sanctions against him are not possible."
Russia says that ousted Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, whom Moscow still recognizes as the country's legitimate leader, requested that Russia send in military forces.
"That's exactly right," the RT editor-in-chief, Margarita Simonyan, wrote in response.
"We should do it, frankly," he told CNN, but adding that Russia should be offered an "exit ramp" out of the crisis through negotiations.
Russia's upper house of Parliament gives the green light for the incursion of military forces into Ukraine's volatile Crimea region. 
Russian state-run TV offered a different view, blaming the crisis on far-right radicals aided by the West.
Brussels already has a reputation as a gridlock capital, ahead of the likes of Los Angeles and London. But Brigitte Grouwels, who heads the city's transport policy, said the expected lockdown of key areas during Obama's visit should encourage locals to walk, cycle and take public transport. She said: "Obama's visit gives an excellent opportunity … to experience first hand a city unencumbered by cars."
In Vienna, where I live, one also hears constant mentions of 1938. Austrians and other citizens of European Union countries are beginning to consider what the end of Ukraine might mean for their own European system. The point is not that Putin is like Hitler; the point is that the removal of a state from Europe has consequences for the continent.  
Turchynov issued a 9 p.m. (3 p.m. ET) deadline for Crimea to release all hostages and stop all provocations. Kiev's new leaders had warned that if all hostages, including Gaiduk, were not released by then, authorities would take action of "technical and technological character," probably meaning turning off utilities.
While no blood has been spilled between the Ukrainian and Russian militaries, no one is breathing easy -- especially amid reports of Ukrainian military facilities in Crimea being under siege.
