Crimea belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine, which was then part of the Soviet Union. The region has a majority ethnic Russian population and other historic ties to Russia.
EU leaders have backed the Madrid government in its handling of the crisis, which Rajoy insists is an internal matter.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Emmanuel Macron shows Vladimir Putin around the grounds of the Palace of Versailles, during the Russian president’s first visit to the palace. Photograph: Alexei Nikolsky/AP
The presidential election and Kiev mayoral vote are taking place against the backdrop of Russia's recent annexation of Crimea, Ukraine's dire economic straits and rumblings of discontent in the country's mainly Russian-speaking eastern provinces.
"Entrepreneurs need to understand their responsibility," Putin told a group of Russian businessmen last week. "Our priority stance is that Russian companies have to be registered here, in their home country and have a transparent ownership structure."
Polls indicate that at least 75 to 80 percent of Russians support the annexation of Crimea, a piece of Russia until it was granted to Ukraine as a gift in 1954. Like many, Mr. Shakhnazarov mentioned the potential rise of fascism in Ukraine — part of the daily news diet on Russian television — as well as similar liberation struggles in Scotland and Kosovo.
Here at the eastern border, the major in charge of this armored detachment shook his head slowly. 
The Ukrainian Parliament voted Friday to create a special commission to investigate the death of the Right Sector leader, Oleksandr Myzychko, who was also known as Sashko Bely and was shot to death in the city of Rivne on Tuesday, apparently as law enforcement authorities tried to arrest him.
In contrast, federalists, centered in the employment rolls of the expansive European institutions, dream of a United States of Europe and fantasize about returning to the 1990s, before the euro, before eastward expansion, when the European Union was smaller, smarter, more prosperous and decidedly Western — and hardly anyone challenged the vision of an “ever closer Union.”
