Campaigning begins this week in an election that will shape Spain and affect the whole of Europe. First, the region’s imprisoned political leaders should be freed to campaign
2.  What theories about the disappearance of Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 can be tested in a flight simulator?  What questions cannot be answered by these exercises?  How might the use of the flight simulator help to rule out some theories behind the plane's disappearance?  
Researchers at the University of Edinburgh identified 419 accounts operating from the Russian Internet Research Agency (IRA) attempting to influence UK politics out of 2,752 accounts suspended by Twitter in the US.
3.  What country was struck by the largest earthquake ever recorded?  How strong was the earthquake that struck off the coast of Chile on Sunday?  How strong was the quake that hit Los Angeles, California, on Monday morning?  According to the video:  What should you do if you are inside a building during an earthquake?  What should you do if you're outside?  
Catalonia's dismissed leader Carles Puigdemont addresses reporters in Brussels last month.
2.  How have the U.S. and the European Union responded to the Crimea vote?  Who is being penalized by these sanctions?  How has Russia responded?
We're looking for your feedback about CNN Student News. Please use this page to leave us comments about today's program, including what you think about our stories and our resources. Also, feel free to tell us how you use them in your classroom. The educators on our staff will monitor this page and may respond to your comments as well.
Judge Pablo Llarena set bail of €150,000, or about $175,000, for Carme Forcadell, who, as speaker of the Catalan Parliament, had read out Catalonia’s declaration of independence from Spain on Oct. 27, shortly before it was approved by separatist lawmakers.
The nationalist rallies are packed. Even Marine Le Pen’s National Front — she took Corsica in the first round of presidential voting last spring — struggles to attract sympathizers.

