At least 146 people are confirmed dead, according to the joint task force leading the search. Earlier, when the death toll was reported to be 128, authorities had said that 174 people were still missing. 
Compounding the tragedy, one of those rescued -- a high school vice principal who was on board the ferry along with more than 300 students -- was found hanging from a tree, police said. 
The pupils and their teachers, from Danwon high school in the Seoul suburb of Ansan, were travelling to Jeju island for a four-day study trip, along with about 150 other passengers, when the accident occurred.
Moon's voice hardens when he talks about the Sewol captain escaping. Discussing the actions of the man who was arrested for his part in the chaotic scenes that followed the delayed evacuation order, he becomes visibly angry.
The charges against Lee appear to shed some light on what authorities have focused on in their efforts to find out what happened to the ferry making its way Wednesday from Incheon to the resort island of Jeju. It sank in frigid waters 20 kilometers (roughly 12 miles) off the coast of South Korea's southern peninsula.
Pupils at the school were sent home early as distraught parents arrived seeking information about their children. Others rushed to ports in the country's south-west after receiving calls from their children confirming they were safe. One pupil said she saw several parents in tears as she left the school. Children who had not joined the trip started crying as news of the accident came through on their mobile phones, reports said."It is an issue of ethics," Moon says. "It is a given that there are laws and regulations, but it's common sense that (the crew) should help people escape."
The divers weren't able to recover the three bodies from a compartment, the coast guard said.  Another 40 dives are planned for Saturday in an attempt to get inside the ferry, the coast guards' Koh Myung Seok told reporters. 
In a promotional video from 2010, he is pictured in the wheelhouse of a ship, looking out to sea through binoculars.
Civil courts in the United States have long viewed captains as having an obligation to protect their passengers and ships, but the cases in South Korea and Italy seem likely to test the notion of criminal liability in disasters.
