By midday Wednesday, authorities had cleared barricades and tents from the long-established protest camp.
Play Video 1:12 'We know what you’re doing,' Theresa May tells Russia – video
Puigdemont, who considers himself the rightful leader of Catalonia, has said he went to Belgium not to flee the Spanish court system, but rather to seek European support for his region's independence bid.
At the time, the former US ambassador to Russia, Michael McFaul, said the vote to leave the EU was “a giant victory for Putin’s foreign policy objectives”.
The police action followed a night of heated clashes between police and protesters, after authorities attempted to clear another road in Mong Kok, Argyle Street, Tuesday. 
Tuesday's clearance effort began peacefully, with some protesters indicating their intention to relocate to other protest camps peacefully. But events spiraled into violence as crowd numbers swelled, with police dressed in riot gear spraying liquid referred to by local media as "tear water" toward the crowd to drive them back.
"I believe it is a personal or individual decision, because everyone has different degrees of consequences that they have to face alone," he said.
"If the Chinese communist party refuses to, or the Hong Kong government does not reflect how Hong Kong people think, we urge them to deny the political reform bill in the Legislative Council and restart the whole political process again."
Today, the leaders of this democratic project stand accused of rebellion and face the severest punishment possible under the Spanish penal code – the same as for cases of terrorism or murder: 30 years in prison. The vice-president and seven Catalan government ministers have been in prison since last Thursday, as well as two Catalan civic leaders, while orders for the rest of the Catalan government to be detained have been issued. This is a colossal outrage that will have serious consequences.
The leaders of two organizations that support the independence bid were also ordered to remain in custody, with the judge saying they might provoke more violence in Catalonia.
