4.  What do some researchers say they have discovered regarding the Big Bang theory?  How did they get this information?  What critical responses have there been regarding this announcement? 
That, at least, is what Evan Ellis, a researcher at the U.S. Army War College and considered by some to be a leading expert on China-Latin America relations, states in his new book China on the Ground in Latin America: Challenges for the Chinese and Impacts on the Region. Ellis’s main argument is that in the last few years the Chinese have started to establish a new, “significant” physical presence in Latin America and the Caribbean – following trade deals, acquisitions, loans and loan-backed construction projects, among other things. As a result, Ellis argues that China now finds itself, for the first time in its 5,000 year history, connected to however many million non-Chinese people in other countries and dependent on the “success and well-being of its commercial representatives in distant parts of the world.”
(CNN) Catalonia's former leader has been released by a Belgian judge after turning himself in to police in Brussels, according to his lawyer.
Carles Puigdemont, center, addresses Catalan mayors in Barcelona after Parliament declared unilateral independence on October 27.
"If the Chinese communist party refuses to, or the Hong Kong government does not reflect how Hong Kong people think, we urge them to deny the political reform bill in the Legislative Council and restart the whole political process again."
Charges against the former officials include sedition, rebellion and misuse of funds
“There are people who want to feel Catalan to the exclusion of all other identities but I’m not prepared to waste my energy on that sort of argument,” Gallego says. “There’s a certain snobbishness about it, a failure to distinguish being different from being superior.”
“It is a huge anomaly in the democratic world that people elected democratically are suffering prison,” Joan Tardá, a lawmaker from the separatist party Esquerra Republicana, told reporters.
Key Concepts: Identify or explain these subjects you heard about in today's show:
Photo
