The crisis in Crimea “doesn’t contribute to improving the overall situation, that’s for sure,” said Luca Cordero di Montezemolo, the chairman of Ferrari and a director of its parent, Fiat.
Asked by CNN's Christiane Amanpour if she was calling for the West to use military force against Russia, Tymoshenko avoided giving a direct answer, saying she "cannot solve this issue." 
Protesters stand on barricades in Kiev. Photograph: Louisa Gouliamaki/AFP/Getty Images
Whether Putin wins or loses in Ukraine, the odds that Russia could be a reliable partner for the U.S. have decreased dramatically.  And this only reinforces the painfully obvious:  When it comes to the core issues facing the U.S. in the Middle East, the U.S. must focus on outcomes, not solutions, and be very sober about what it might do to contribute to them.
Putin is not rubbing his hands in glee at the prospect of an epic battle with the West over Ukraine. In fact, says Carnegie's Andrew Weiss, who worked on policy toward the region in the Clinton and George H.W. Bush administrations, "I think if you're sitting in the Kremlin the prospect of a Yugoslav scenario in Ukraine is quite scary."
Once there, Mr. Avakov said, the fugitive holed up in a private sanitarium before heading for Belbek Airport, in the south of the peninsula. Apparently alerted to waiting authorities there, Mr. Yanukovych assembled his security detail, asked who would remain with him and who would quit, and then fled anew with Andriy Klyuyev, most recently head of his administration and a partner in business and politics since their rise together in Donetsk, a tough coal-mining town.
His political party appears to have turned against him, saying it blames him for the "robbery and deception" of the nation. It accused Yanukovych of making illegal orders that led to casualties, financial debt and shame in the eyes of the world.
On Monday, the United States put on hold all military-to-military engagements with Russia, an official announced.
By Monday evening, rumors abounded of the president making it to the safety of a Russian ship in Sevastopol. Or his yacht. Or of hiding out in Balaklava, once a secret Soviet port and famed in the 19th century as the site of the infamous Charge of the Light Brigade by British cavalry in the Crimean War. Or of re-emerging in the Donetsk region, hiding either in a nearby monastery or his birthplace, the town of Yenakiyeve, 40 miles from Donetsk.
Republican Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina called for the revival of plans for a NATO missile defense shield in Poland that Russia had strongly opposed.
