"We've had a lot of people calling in, they are terrified, they want to keep their oath but they don't know what is happening and are worried about getting proper support from Kiev," he said.
On Tuesday, words such as “Hong Kong,” “barricades” and “Occupy Central,” the putative name for the civil disobedience campaign, were either blocked or yielded few results on weibo. Sina had also neutralized the word “umbrella.”
China observers noted that while the app can't be accessed in China for most, the country's First Lady Peng Liyuan's official Instagram account posted a picture of her and her husband, China's President Xi Jinping, on Monday. 
The Chinese government maintains strict controls over what can be seen on the Internet and social media. This firewall extends to Facebook, Twitter and YouTube, and Google is rarely accessible. Hong Kong does not fall under the same restrictions. 
C.Y. Leung said at a news conference Sunday afternoon that a round of consultations on electoral reform will take place "shortly" but went on to appeal to pro-democracy activists to engage in rational discussions through lawful means.
"We have not even started to discuss the detailed but crucial aspects of the nominating process for potential chief executive candidates," he wrote in an exclusive commentary.
C.Y. Leung told CNN that fears that the nominating process for the 2017 election were too restrictive were "unfounded."
"The courage of the students and members of the public in their spontaneous decision to stay has touched many Hong Kong people. Yet, the government has remained unmoved. As the wheel of time has reached this point, we have decided to arise and act."
"Occupy Central has formally begun," said a statement by the group. "The two nights of occupation of Civic Square in Admiralty have completely embodied the awakening of Hong Kong people's desire to decide their own lives.
The protest movement developed into a much larger, more inclusive display of defiance as the Occupy Central movement joined the students' rally early Sunday. 
