Yet as the weekend progressed, it was becoming clearer that for Mr. Erdogan and his religiously conservative followers, the moment was a triumph of political Islam more than anything else.
Wearing a dark business suit and tie, he cut a lonely figure as he held forth from a table, behind which stood four blue-and-yellow Ukrainian flags.
Elections planned for May 25 in Ukraine would be illegal, he said, adding that he would not participate in them if they are held. "I consider that all the elections must take place in accordance with the law and constitution of Ukraine," he said.
Many Brexit supporters say this is the reason for the country's levels of net immigration -- the number of people migrating to the country minus those who leave. Net migration reached a near-record 330,000 in 2015, according to the Office of National Statistics, numbers that have been used to strengthen the leave camp's position, fanning the flames of growing anti-immigration sentiment.
The location of the news conference itself underscored his isolation. "I'm struck by the fact that he's in Rostov-on-Don and not in Moscow and that he has had a phone call with President Putin and not met," former U.S. Ambassador to Russia Michael McFaul told CNN. "I thought he expressed dismay that President Putin has not been more decisive to defend him."
"Everything that I can do, I will do to the end of my life to be with the people of Ukraine -- not with those nationalists, not with those bandits, but the people of Ukraine," he said, adding that Western countries, including the United States, bore some of the blame for the unrest.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest The Turkish military helicopter at Alexandroupolis airport. Photograph: Xinhua/Rex/Shutterstock
The choreography has been impressive. Within hours of the airport seizure, Russian MPs proposed a bill in the state Duma simplifying procedures for getting Russian passports to Ukrainians. The goal, the MPs said, was to protect a "brotherly nation". Russia's most important opposition leader, Alexei Navalny, meanwhile, has been placed under house arrest for two months and denied access to the internet. The Kremlin, that most risk-averse of entities, has everything covered.
When I reached home I started hearing the sound of jets getting louder. People were rushing to the banks to get money, and to the supermarkets for supplies. I was worried banks wouldn’t have any cash left.
He says lower-ranking officers launched the coup, rebelling against senior officers.
