More is being expected of the EU now than in recent years and when put to the challenge, walking whilst talking has thus far not come easily.
Separate from the vote, Crimean lawmakers approved a resolution on Monday that declared the Black Sea peninsula an independent, sovereign state and requested to join the Russian Federation.
At 5pm, after a minute’s silence for the victims of the terror attacks, the Catalan national anthem, Els Segadors, rang out along the boulevards as helicopters clattered above. Later, huge banners printed with the words pau (peace), sí and “referèndum és democràcia” made their way over the heads of the crowds.
The European Union came about as a project to safeguard and guarantee our rights and freedoms. Defending the fundamental rights of Catalan citizens against a wave of repression from the Spanish state is also the same as defending the rights of Spanish and European citizens.
In the tumultuous aftermath of the vote, Ms. Cortizo was among the around 200,000 people who demonstrated in Barcelona in support of the two secessionist leaders jailed following an order by a Spanish court.
"The alternative is they take the vote but that the Russians don't move very quickly," Pifer said.
That is what happened in March to Artur Mas, Catalonia’s former leader, who was fined and barred from holding office for two years after a court found him guilty of organizing the last independence referendum.
You do not need to share the Catalan regional government’s roadmap to realise that the main party responsible for worsening the situation has been the intransigent government of Spain’s prime minister, Mariano Rajoy.
Rajoy warned in the letter that if the answer was yes, and Puigdemont refused to withdraw the declaration by the following Thursday, he could impose direct rule under article 155 of the Spanish constitution.
Spain's Constitutional Court has outlawed the plebiscite, and the national administration in Madrid asserts that any such vote would be unconstitutional.
