“We do not need any foreign lawmakers to carry out probes. I hope they can clearly see this basic reality,” she said.
Although regional institutions were suspended from 1938 to 1977, Catalan bourgeois elites have displayed remarkable survival instincts, entering into alliances with the forces of the Spanish right whenever they deemed it necessary to maintain order. Catalan conservative nationalists have ruled the region for more than three decades in the democratic period. These same nationalists have voted in favour of about half of the national budgets during this period. If changes are to be made in Spain’s federal structure, they shouldn’t be based upon the false assumption that Catalonia has had no role in national politics.
Mr. Puigdemont was hoping to run for re-election from Brussels, and he is still expected to campaign from there. Judge Llarena’s decision on Tuesday left it up to Mr. Puigdemont to choose whether and when to return to Spain.
• Carles Puigdemont became the 130th president of Catalonia in 2016European leaders, however, have been largely unsympathetic to the Catalan push for independence, and Belgian leaders did not exactly welcome the separatists with open arms.
Forcadell left jail on Friday after agreeing to renounce any political activity that went against the Spanish constitution, in effect banning her from campaigning for independence in the December election.
Solidarity with the movement was on display as it ended. The police were forced to detain dozens of the city’s pro-democracy A-list on Thursday afternoon, hauling wealthy lawyers, prominent lawmakers, student leaders and a media mogul through a phalanx of officers and onto waiting buses with barred windows.
Researchers at the University of Edinburgh identified 419 accounts operating from the Russian Internet Research Agency (IRA) attempting to influence UK politics out of 2,752 accounts suspended by Twitter in the US.
Tai told reporters outside that they were asked to record their particular offenses committed during the protest movement and then told they were free to go. He said they were not given a date of when they need to return to the police station. 
Since his arrival in Belgium one month ago, Mr. Puigdemont has held a few campaign events, at one point inviting more than 500 Catalan mayors. He is expected to rally 20,000 Catalans in Brussels on Thursday, according to officials.
