For the last two months, Mr. Pereverziev has been the commander of what he called the 16th regiment of the Maidan self-defense forces. He said there were about 40 such “regiments” — with about 100 troops, they are more like companies — created over the past three months, and their commanders are called Sotnyks, an old Cossack rank roughly equivalent to a captain in the Ukrainian army. His wife commands a smaller women’s division.
Already, even as the government has arrested thousands of soldiers and officers who allegedly took part in the failed coup, there were signs that it was using the moment to widen a crackdown on perceived enemies. Alongside the military, the government also dismissed thousands of judges, who seemingly had no role to play in a military revolt.
The attempt quickly failed. Soldiers laid down their guns and surrendered to the police and the anti-coup mob. Some soldiers appeared on TV covered in blood, bruised and scared. Over 9,000 soldiers have been taken into custody.
The Turkish government shot back denying any wrongdoing. In a statement the they called the allegations "unsubstantial and unfounded" adding that the accusation "detainees are subject to rape are completely fictional claims and only amount to aspersion." The Justice Ministry insists anybody found guilty of torture will be held accountable.
Then, around 3:30 a.m., he landed in Istanbul, after a dangerous flight undertaken while the plotters still had fighter jets in the air — the surest sign that the revolt was failing.
“There are people for whom Islam plays a big role in their lives in Turkey,” he added. “And there are people for whom Islam plays no role.”
On Sunday, Turkey’s nearly 85,000 mosques, in unison, blared from their loudspeakers a prayer traditionally recited for martyrs who have died in war and called for people to continue to rally against the plotters of the coup.
Videos and photos posted on social media show crowds marching through the streets -- some marchers facing off against tanks and armored vehicles.
Exiled writer Mahir Zeynalov brings news of president Erdoğan’s crackdown on the media after coup attempt to the world
As for Russia, Mr. Pereverziev says he thinks that Moscow’s efforts to meddle in Ukraine “to escalate the situation” will fail, especially given that the Tatars, the ethnic minority indigenous to Crimea, support a united Ukraine. “Russia has nothing to offer us except fuel and energy,” he said. “And in the time of shale gas, soon we won’t need them.”
