Other survivors said they feared the death toll would rise significantly as they believed dozens of people were still trapped inside the ferry after it listed and then sank into the sea about 20km (12 miles) from the coast of Byungpoong island about two hours after issuing a distress signal.
"And then the other reason he stays on board the vessel is for salvage rights. For the captain to leave the vessel in an early situation, it's not the way it should be done."
A total of 18 helicopters and 34 rescue boats have been sent to the area, Lee Gyeong-og, a government vice minister, told a televised news conference. He added that the South Korean president, Park Geun-hye had urged rescue teams to do their utmost to save everyone on board.
"Lee is also charged with failing to do the right thing to guide the passengers to escape and thereby leading to their death or injury."
White mums and lilies, which signify death, poured in from strangers, covering the hallway leading to her memorial room. The flowers contain messages like "We will not forget your noble spirit." "We will always remember your sacrifice." "Hero." An online petition has gone up urging the government to award her a Good Samaritan award. 
"I believe it is safer than any other vehicle," he says, "as long as they follow the instructions of our crew members."
Another told the network that at least one helicopter had reached the vessel, adding that other passengers had remained in their cabins soon after the accident but were having trouble keeping their balance.
"We heard a big thumping sound and the boat stopped," one passenger told the YTN by telephone. "The boat is tilting and we have to hold on to something to stay seated."
As dozens of boats, helicopters and a team of South Korean navy personnel frantically tried to locate as many as 295 missing passengers before darkness set in, survivors recalled their dramatic escape bids.
The cases of the Sewol and the Costa Concordia have raised questions about a captain's obligations to passengers when a vessel runs into trouble.
