“In this most recent attack, dozens of children suffocated to death while they slept,” said Ahmad Tarakji, the head of the Syrian American Medical Society (Sams), which supports hospitals in opposition-controlled areas in Syria. “This should strike at the very core of our humanity. How much longer will the world fail to respond to these heinous crimes?”
Read MoreHowever, US allies and Syrian opposition figures questioned the coherence of the administration’s position, noting that the attack followed statements from both Tillerson and Haley that appeared to formalise a change in US policy, away from demanding an end to the Assad regime.
Basma Kodmani, a member of the Syrian opposition, suggested the attack was in fact a direct consequence of the US decision to relax pressure on Assad.
The Idlib massacre has dramatically underlined another hole in the administration’s approach: a failure to appreciate the degree to which Assad’s brutality was a driver of extremism.
The starting assumption of the Trump administration’s Syrian policy was that it would be possible to concentrate almost exclusively on fighting Islamic State extremists, possibly in concert with Russia, and only afterwards talk in earnest about the country’s political future. It was never clear how that policy was consistent with pushing back Iranian influence in the region, as Tehran would benefit from western focus on Isis, and an easing of pressure on its ally the Assad regime.
US Syria policy: signs of shift as Trump son meets pro-Russia Damascus figure Read more
“The recent statements by US officials suggesting otherwise only serve to legitimise the actions of this war criminal in Damascus,” McCain said.
Criticism also came from Republican leaders. Senator John McCain said the idea that the Syrian people would be able to vote on Assad’s future while being bombed was “an absurd fiction”.
“I told them that we need clarity. What’s your position? The question is to know, yes or no, whether the Americans support a political transition in Syria, which means organising this transition, elections, and that at the end of the process, the question of Assad’s departure is asked,” Ayrault said.
