But their younger counterparts aren't budging for the time being, despite the recent loss of one key protest site and clashes with police at the demonstrators' main encampment earlier this week.
Region could be given the power to collect and manage its own taxes in attempt to defuse crisis over independence bid
Catalan nationalism has featured clear appeals to ethnicity, and any reader can search on the internet for dog-whistle or outright supremacist statements. Common messages have included “Spain steals from us”, “Subsidised Spain lives off productive Catalonia”, or posters showing ragged kids from southern Spain living off the taxes paid by the Catalan middle class.
“It’s not indifference, it’s hostility,” said Gilles Simeoni, head of Corsica’s executive council, and leader of the nationalists’ “autonomist” wing.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
The Spanish high court has jailed eight former Catalan government members, along with the leaders of the Catalan National Assembly (ANC) and Omnium Cultural, while investigations continue.
Still, the lack of reaction from the mainland is intensely frustrating to the nationalist leaders here, spurring them to redouble their campaign efforts so that Paris will notice a large victory.
The high court last week issued arrest warrants on charges of rebellion and sedition for Puigdemont, who flew to Brussels after being deposed, and four other former government members who went with him.
Footage of Wong's arrest shows the teenager being suddenly rushed by a man wearing a police vest, then forcefully dragged away and disappearing beneath a huddle of police officers.
It is worth reminding ourselves of which Catalans have had a role in Spanish politics. It has been, overwhelmingly, the Catalan elites, which brings us to another important detail: Catalan nationalism is neither inclusive nor progressive. Catalonia is inhabited by two cultural communities, each representing about half the population. But in terms of income, social status and influence the difference is stark. The Spanish-speaking population, immigrants or descendants of economic migrants who arrived in the 20th century, is, on average, less wealthy, less educated and less politically mobilised.
