He expected more from the United States and its allies after the 2013 attack, what he called “a position that was appropriate for the free world.” But the result was an agreement, brokered by Russia, for Mr. Assad to give up his chemical weapons.
Even some Syrians who welcomed the strike questioned why, after all of the war’s brutality, it was the chemical attack this past week that had brought a show of force against Mr. Assad.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
RT called Wahl's action a "self-promotional stunt" and, commenting on Martin's move, said RT staff members are free to express their views. 
“A sense of crisis may be a little bit (of) a strong word, but there certainly exists a sense of uneasiness, widely shared by the Japanese industrialists,” he said. “But I think they are telling themselves that now is the time for them to see what is going to happen down the road, rather than jumping into a uneasy conclusion.”
The subject of fuel cutoff is likely to come up in a phone call with President Xi that the White House was trying to arrange.
"That was something used in Kim Il-sung's time and applauded; it meant he was 'one of us', not an elite intellectual, speaking from his heart," she added.
This programme has accelerated under Obama. In a speech at the National Press Club in Washington DC last December as Ukraine's Maidan Square clashes escalated, Nuland confirmed that the US had invested in total "over $5 billion" to "ensure a secure and prosperous and democratic Ukraine" - she specifically congratulated the "Euromaidan" movement.
Zaitokukai and other far-right groups held demonstrations in Korean neighbourhoods in Tokyo, Osaka and other cities, with activists describing Koreans as “cockroaches” and urging them to die or “go home”.
Officials said on Saturday that divers had reached two large sleeping units in the ferry where many of the lost may lie dead. Large objects that toppled when the vessel tipped over and sank are believed to be keeping divers from reaching bodies in at least one of the two rooms.
