If you didn’t fully grasp Thursday’s blockbuster announcement that scientists had detected gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric of spacetime that were first anticipated by Albert Einstein a century ago, you were not alone.
Gravitational waves: 'we can hear the universe' – live Read more
Physicists have announced the discovery of gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric of spacetime that were first anticipated by Albert Einstein a century ago.
The phenomenon detected was the collision of two black holes. Using the world’s most sophisticated detector, the scientists listened for 20 thousandths of a second as the two giant black holes, one 35 times the mass of the sun, the other slightly smaller, circled around each other.
We asked a few experts to explain it to us – to really break it down in its simplest terms – as though we were children. And if you can do any better, offer your explanation in the comments.
Again, this is perhaps especially true when you think that the waves were expected. A “null result” would have been amazingly interesting, and also quite hard to believe. The obvious explanation would be that the experiment just wasn’t working properly, did not in fact have the claimed sensitivity. So preparing the defence against that criticism was a major concern, involving the injection of fake data, lots of double-blind internal secrecy and so on, to make sure that if these ripples were there, LIGO would indeed see them. They were there, and it has seen them. The data, the same wave pattern seen in two detectors, are stunning and totally convincing.
The scientists detected their cataclysmic event using an instrument so sensitive it could detect a change in the distance between the solar system and the nearest star four light years away to the thickness of a human hair.
Others could not duplicate his result, but few doubted that gravitational waves were real. Dr. Weber’s experiment inspired a generation of scientists to look harder for Einsteinian marks on the universe.
He reasoned that something must cross space to transmit the force of gravity. Faraday’s reasoning inspired the great British mathematician James Clerk Maxwell to think about how an electric force travelled, and arrive at an understanding of light and a prediction of radio waves.
It’s been hard for us to measure these waves, until recently two dying stars sent out such huge waves in the last moments of their lives that we were finally able to.
