An unidentified crew member on the Sewol talked to two different Vessel Traffic Service centers as the ship sank Wednesday morning, the transcript revealed. Someone on the ship contacted the traffic service in Jeju -- the ferry's destination -- at 8:55 a.m. and communicated with it before the conversation switched to Jindo VTS, which was closer, about 11 minutes later.
Authorities said the dead included a female crew member in her early 20 and two male high school students. A coast guard officer confirmed a fourth fatality but had no immediate details about it.
"Please notify the coast guard. Our ship is in danger. The ship is rolling right now," a crew member on the ship first tells authorities in a dramatic conversation that took place while the Sewol ferry was sinking last week. 
"The tidal current was strong and water temperature was cold, and there was no rescue boat," Lee told reporters, according to CNN affiliate YTN. "So I had everyone stand by and wait for the rescue boat to arrive."
Among the text messages, photos and video clips that have been produced by passengers of the ill-fated ship, Su-hyeon’s 15-minute footage bears the most dramatic witness to the panic and fear, as well as youthful naïveté and optimism, of the students trapped inside the ship while many of the crew members, including the captain, were among the first to desert their vessel.
Jindo Vessel Traffic Services Center:  We are reaching out to nearby fishing boats. ...Please approach as quick as possible. Please actively cooperate in rescue operation.  ...Are the passengers able to escape?
The area had been shrouded in fog overnight, leading to the cancellation of many ferry services to islands. But news reports said visibility in the area was fair on Wednesday morning.
The captain was not in the steering room when the accident took place, according to police and his own account.
Jindo VTS: "The captain should make (the) decision to make people escape. We do not know the situation so captain make final decision on passengers' escape."
Facebook Twitter Pinterest South Korean coastguards on the rescue operation around the stricken passenger ferry Sewol on Wednesday. Photograph: Yonhap/EPA
