With hundreds of people still missing, the heartbreaking scene will likely play out over and over again. 
Dozens of coastguard and navy vessels were battling to rescue passengers, including 325 high school pupils and their teachers. A major rescue operation is now underway involving more than 30 coastguard and military ships, as well as about a dozen helicopters.
Early reports by some South Korean media indicated that all 338 high school pupils and their teachers were safe following a huge rescue operation involving civilian and military vessels, and helicopters.
The captain wasn't at the helm of the Sewol when it started to sink, the prosecutor said. A third mate was at the helm.  
"Mr. Lee is charged with causing the Sewol ship to sink by failing to slow down while sailing the narrow route and making (a) turn excessively," the prosecutor told the semiofficial Yonhap news agency. 
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Rescue workers scaled the side of the ferry to reach trapped passengers.
A crew member, described as the third mate, appeared with Lee and, like the captain, the third mate was in handcuffs. The man was identified only as Park. 
"It is not clear where he was when the accident occurred, although it is clear that he was not in the steering room before the actual accident happened," state prosecutor Jae-Eok Park said.
Another high school student who survived reported that a crew member named Park Ji-young, 22, had helped teenagers to get life jackets and escape by urging them to jump into the frigid waters of the Yellow Sea where rescue boats were waiting. She stayed behind without a life jacket for herself despite the youngsters’ entreaties to jump with them. “After saving you, I will get out,” she said. “The crew goes out last.”
According to news reports at the time, entertainers on board to perform and the cruise director coordinated the rescue effort. They said they were among the last people to leave the ship, along with members of the South African Navy who were dropped aboard to search for any stragglers.
