Although regional institutions were suspended from 1938 to 1977, Catalan bourgeois elites have displayed remarkable survival instincts, entering into alliances with the forces of the Spanish right whenever they deemed it necessary to maintain order. Catalan conservative nationalists have ruled the region for more than three decades in the democratic period. These same nationalists have voted in favour of about half of the national budgets during this period. If changes are to be made in Spain’s federal structure, they shouldn’t be based upon the false assumption that Catalonia has had no role in national politics.
“He does have very strong backing from Beijing — they’ve found him someone they can really work with in tough times,” said a person with close ties to the Hong Kong and Beijing governments, who insisted on anonymity because of the continuing political tensions.
Satirical article saying Spanish riot police took cocaine lands editor in court Read more
In polling for the Catalan elections called by Rajoy for 21 December, pro-independence parties are marginally in front with a projected 1.974 million votes to the 1.966m for the unionist parties, Ciudadanos, the Catalan Socialist party and the PP.
Campaigning began Tuesday in Catalonia for fresh regional elections on December 21.
Charlotte Chan, a 19-year-old nursing student, reclined on a sofa that had been used to block an escalator leading to the government offices and said that even those who wanted to keep up the demonstrations could see that they lacked broad support.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
He also said he believed protesters’ vows that they would keep challenging the authorities. “We will clear it, they will regroup, we will clear it again, they will regroup,” he said. “But eventually, they will dissipate.”
Surely, what must prevail is the will of the majority of the citizens and the respect for fundamental rights included in international treaties signed by the kingdom of Spain, and also incorporated into its constitution. What we have instead are two levels of democracy in Spain: you can be a pro-independence party, but only if you do not rule. You will be charged with rebellion if you comply with your electoral commitment. And if you are against independence but you lack a parliamentary force to govern, the almighty state will come to your defence.
Catalan nationalism has featured clear appeals to ethnicity, and any reader can search on the internet for dog-whistle or outright supremacist statements. Common messages have included “Spain steals from us”, “Subsidised Spain lives off productive Catalonia”, or posters showing ragged kids from southern Spain living off the taxes paid by the Catalan middle class.
