Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Police try to stop people from attacking a judge, suspected in the failed coup plot, in Erzurum, Turkey on Tuesday, July 19. Turkey has fired or suspended about 50,000 people as the government intensifies a crackdown following last weekend's failed coup attempt. Teachers, journalists, police and judges have been affected. Hide Caption 1 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Police escort Turkish soldiers, accused of taking part in the attempted coup, as they leave a courthouse in Istanbul's Bakirkoy neighborhood on Saturday, July 16. Hide Caption 2 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish police officers cover the eyes of soldiers as they are transported in a bus from the courthouse in Istanbul on July 16. Hide Caption 3 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Akin Ozturk, front row, center, a four-star general and former commander of the Turkish air force, is among those in police custody whom President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's government has accused of having led the failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 4 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey In a mass detention in Ankara, dozens of detainees are forced to kneel, partially stripped. Hide Caption 5 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A man waves a Turkish flag from a car roof during a July 16 march around Kizilay Square in Ankara after the attempted military coup. Hide Caption 6 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Damaged vehicles are abundant outside the presidential palace in Ankara on July 16. Hide Caption 7 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People kick and beat a Turkish soldier suspected in the attempted coup on Istanbul's Bosphorus Bridge on July 16. Hide Caption 8 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Women react after people took over a military position on the Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul. Hide Caption 9 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People gather outside the Turkish Parliament in Ankara during an extraordinary session after the failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 10 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkey Prime Minister Binali Yildirim addresses the Turkish Parliament after the failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 11 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A protester rests on a bench as smoke billows from the Turkish military headquarters in Ankara. Hide Caption 12 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People stand under a huge Turkish flag during a march around Kizilay Square in Ankara in reaction to the attempted coup. Hide Caption 13 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Members of the Turkish military surrender on Istanbul's Bosphorus Bridge on after a failed coup attempt. Hide Caption 14 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People protesting against the coup wave a Turkish flag on top of a monument in Istanbul's Taksim Square. Hide Caption 15 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Clothes and weapons belonging to soldiers involved in the coup attempt are scattered on Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul. Hide Caption 16 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A Turkish police officer in Istanbul embraces a man on a tank in the wake of the violence overnight. Hide Caption 17 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Smoke billows from the direction of the Presidential Palace in Ankara on July 16. Hide Caption 18 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People gather on top of a Turkish military tank in Ankara in the morning after the coup attempt. National intelligence officials said the coup was put down and that the government remains in control. Hide Caption 19 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish people wave national flags from a car in Istanbul. Hide Caption 20 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People gather around a car damaged by a tank in Kizilay Square early on July 16. Hide Caption 21 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People take to the streets near the Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge during clashes with military forces in Istanbul. Hide Caption 22 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People escape the clashes in Ankara early Saturday. Hide Caption 23 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Tanks move into position as Turkish citizens attempt to stop them in Ankara. Hide Caption 24 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Citizens in Sivas rush to the streets during the chaotic coup attempt. Hide Caption 25 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A man approaches Turkish military with his hands up at the entrance to the partially closed Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul. Hide Caption 26 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey A wounded man is given medical care at the entrance to the Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul after clashes with Turkish military. Hide Caption 27 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey People react in front of the Justice and Development Party's headquarters in Karabuk. Hide Caption 28 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Soldiers secure an area as supporters of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan protest in Istanbul's Taksim Square. Hide Caption 29 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish military members make their way through the streets of Istanbul. Hide Caption 30 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Supporters of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan protest in front of soldiers in Istanbul's Taksim Square. Hide Caption 31 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey President Recep Tayyip Erdogan speaks on CNN Turk via a FaceTime call in Istanbul after members of the country's military attempted to overthrow the government. Hide Caption 32 of 39 Photos: Failed military coup in Turkey Turkish soldiers block Istanbul's iconic Bosphorus Bridge.
Another Syrian in Istanbul argued that if the coup had succeeded, Syrians would have been kicked out of Turkey. Ahmed, a Syrian who runs a small workshop in Istanbul, envisaged a scenario where a new government would “rebuild Turkey’s relationship with the Syrian regime, and systematically deport Syrians to Syria within two or three years”.
“If Erdoğan leaves, we are screwed,” wrote one Syrian. “Let them get to the squares and support [Erdoğan’s supporters] in maintaining democracy.”
But for some, the anxiety continues. While some want to actively show their support for Erdoğan, others see danger in being associated with any particular political faction. After the Syrian charity Dubarah posted a Facebook message that advised Syrians to stay out of Turkish politics, it sparked a wide range of responses.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Syrians at refugee camp near the Bab al-Salam border crossing on the Turkish-Syrian border. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty Images
Up in Istanbul, Qassoum “felt relieved. All the tension was gone”.
So when the sun rose on Saturday to reveal that Erdoğan remained in charge of the country, many Syrians would have been hugely reassured. Some even joined pro-Erdoğan protests, while a group still stuck inside Syria reportedly gathered at a Turkish border crossing to express their satisfaction.
Others feared what would happen to rebel-held northern Syria. Turkey has all but stopped letting Syrians cross into Turkey itself, but it has long provided support to the communities and rebels suffering on the other side of its southern border.
Syrian refugees experienced a comparable backlash in Egypt in 2013, following the coup that ousted the Muslim Brotherhood, a loose Erdoğan ally. Under the Brotherhood’s rule, Syrians had been given preferential treatment, and were therefore perceived to support the group. So after the Brotherhood’s removal, Syrians were among the victims of the new regime’s crackdown – and on Friday, Syrians feared a similar situation in Turkey.
Syrian refugees suffer backlash in Egypt after Mohamed Morsi's removal Read more
