"That said, you obviously wouldn't put too much into it, and although I usually advise investors to hold funds for the long term, with single country funds it's different. If you double your money in a year, cash in and go."
Jeremy Cook, chief economist at currency broker WorldFirst, watched sterling plummet throughout the early hours of Friday. He said: “Sterling is in freefall at the moment. It looks like its goose is cooked.” At one point, Cook shouted across the trading room: “It’s fallen into the 30s,”, as the likelihood of a leave vote increased and the pound fell below $1.40.
Johnson is far from a buffoon. He’s an agile thinker, gifted communicator and natural opportunist who made a reasonable fist of governing London after recruiting some reliable deputies (enter Michael Gove). He’s smart enough to have learned from the recent Labour leadership campaign – in which managerially competent candidates were slaughtered for being on the wrong side of a visceral grassroots argument – that elites only survive in this febrile climate by pleasing the masses. Perhaps somehow it will all come together.
"They have taken an oath and they want to remain loyal to their oath, but of course it's hard, of course they are wondering what will happen next and what sort of country they will be living in," he said. "It would be nice if there was some more decisive news or orders from Kiev. We are waiting for orders, but we are not receiving any."Yet it may not take for those implications to become clear. At the last count, there were more than 400 players plying their trade in the top two divisions in England and Scotland, with the vast majority unlikely to pass the stringent work permit requirements introduced by the Football Association in March 2015. Previously, in order to qualify to play in the UK, players needed to have played in at least 75% of their country’s senior international matches over the previous two years.
He turned the vote into political capital, issuing a statement later in the day saying the UK had exercised the “sacred right” of free people to independence and reassert control over their own politics, borders and economy. He promised a Trump administration would deepen its bonds with the UK.
Boris Johnson says 'no need for haste' to start EU exit negotiations Read more
And let’s hope to God he’s right. Any remainer who doesn’t pray to be proved wrong about Brexit is callous, wishing disaster on people who are unable to afford it. But right now, what scorched earth Johnson stands to inherit – a nation febrile and divided, teetering on the brink of economic and constitutional crisis. It’s all over for David Cameron now. But it feels, too, like the end of a broader modernising movement to which both he and Johnson belonged.
Once inside the body, Sarin interferes with an enzyme called acetylcholinesterase, which helps control the nervous system. A few drops can be lethal, with children particularly vulnerable, and death can come within minutes.
“The 23 June is a historic day. It is Great Britain’s independence day. The people were asked – and they decided. The European Union as a political union has failed,” said Storch, who was recently expelled from the Tories’ party group in the European parliament after suggesting German police might be within their rights to shoot refugees trying to cross the border.
