A spokesman for the Ukrainian Defense Ministry in Crimea, Vladislav Seleznev, said military personnel and their families from a number of military bases were expected to depart Saturday for inland Ukraine.
Tymoshenko was imprisoned in 2011 in a corruption case linked to a gas deal she brokered with Russia in 2009. She served two years of a seven-year term, mainly under prison guard in a hospital in Kharkiv.
But Macron said France would show “no weakness” if chemical weapons were used, and would immediately respond.
The Crimea crisis is the latest setback for the ambitions of Austrian banks to establish themselves in territory once ruled from Vienna by the Hapsburgs. Until the dynasty’s demise after World War I, its reach extended into modern-day Ukraine and included much of Eastern Europe, including territory now part of Hungary, Poland and Romania.
Mr. Simonov said he signed the opposition letter not out of any support for a Western position — “I hate the politics of the U.S. as much as I hate the politics of my own country,” he said — but because he did not want to see Russia take on the world again.
Emmanuel Macron, the new French president, has warned that France would respond immediately to any use of chemical weapons in Syria, while urging a closer partnership with Russia in fighting Islamic State (Isis) in the country.
The Ukip leader also said his party had helped undermine the British National party by stealing a third of its voters. Farage said he was proud his party had given "frustrated" people a choice to avoid the group's racist agenda.
The United States and EU are seeking to exert pressure on Russia through a combination of sanctions and diplomatic isolation. 
"I do not think anyone's done more … to damage the BNP than Ukip and I am quite proud of that."In citing extremist action, Mr. Putin sought to capitalize on a tense internal showdown in Kiev. Members of an ultranationalist group, Right Sector, have surrounded the Ukrainian Parliament over the last two days, demanding the resignation of Ukraine’s acting interior minister over the shooting death of one of the group’s leaders earlier this week in western Ukraine.
