"I was walking in my local high street, talking to a friend of mine -- we were speaking English -- and a chap just behind me shouted 'I like your accent' in a very loud voice -- I did feel it was a bit threatening.
She adds: "It's far more than a pat on the back, 'oh we're all in our non-racist club, aren't we wonderful?' You have a duty to intervene for your fellow residents."
I am shocked - visit from @bt_uk engineer just now who tells me that I'm a burden on the UK because I have kids in school #PostRefRacism — Jan Rosenow (@janrosenow) June 30, 2016
It is not clear how many of those 331 attacks are linked to the referendum, but there have been several high-profile cases tied to the vote for Brexit, the combination of words for Britain and exit that refers to the United Kingdom leaving the European Union.
"I think those people really lack a sense of empathy for what it must be like to walk into a room or step on a train -- full of strangers -- and you just have to hope that none of them are going to come after you," she says. "I completely agree. It is patronizing if you just wear the pin and think you've done your job."
Despite some backlash, Allison says most of the reaction has been "overwhelmingly positive." Three days since unwittingly launching the initiative against racism, she's thrilled by how many are taking to social media to share their #safetypins and reassure their fellow Britons that they are welcome and supported regardless of ethnicity or background.
No piercing, so my #safetypin is going next to the other symbol of helping others - my stethoscope pic.twitter.com/u5aOhpHYWc — Dr Keith Grimes (@keithgrimes) June 29, 2016
A small addition to my clothing today for solidarity against racism. #safetypin pic.twitter.com/sunKskLTKg — Albert Freeman (@AlbFreeman) June 29, 2016London (CNN) Police in Britain have recorded a dramatic rise in racist attacks in the wake of Brexit, with five times the usual number of incidents reported in the week since the country voted in a referendum to leave the European Union.
The National Police Chiefs' Council says 331 cases have been reported to the True Vision anti-hate crime website since last Thursday, compared to the regular weekly average of 63.
