"These visits will be an opportunity to forge a strong working relationship that we can build upon and which I hope to develop with more leaders across the European Union in the weeks and months ahead," May said in a statement Wednesday.
Lenovo, which bought IBM’s personal computer business in 2005, will be joined by Dell. The US computer maker said it had held off on price increases for UK business customers before the referendum but that they were now on the way, although consumer products would not be affected immediately.
Earlier in the day, May made her debut at Prime Minister's Questions in Parliament, fielding questions from lawmakers. During the session, she reiterated her commitment to Britain leaving the EU, following the vote to do so in a referendum last month.
Officials will need time to consult with the governments of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, as well as with various industry sectors, to work out the UK's objectives for the negotiations, according to a statement from 10 Downing Street.
The Bank of England said its agents had stepped up their investigations in the wake of the Brexit vote to find out how businesses were reacting. It found that for many companies the result had come as a shock, but with few having contingency plans, the tendency had been to adopt a “business as usual” approach.
The agents’ report was released at the same time as the Office for National Statistics reported that the labour market remained solid in the period from March to May, the first three months of the referendum campaign, with the jobless rate falling to its lowest level in more than a decade.
New trade deals
Ukraine has become an important crop exporter. It was the fourth biggest seller of corn last year and is set to be the sixth largest wheat supplier this year.
Wheat and corn prices have risen sharply in response to the crisis in Ukraine, which is one of the world's biggest exporters of both crops.
She said that she understood that the delayed triggering of the article "will not please everyone."
