In Britain’s 1997 general election, UKIP won just 0.3 percent of the vote. But the prospects of Mr. Farage and his party were immeasurably helped when the European Union forced Britain to adopt more proportional voting in elections for the European Parliament.
• An upside of the crisis for British journalists: This is the story of a lifetime. “For journalists, has there ever been a better time to be alive?” Roy Greenslade, a journalism professor, asks in The Guardian.
The party’s roughly 150,000 members will choose between the final two candidates, in a process to be completed by Sept. 9.
“Our base is too narrow, and so, occasionally, are our sympathies,” she warned her colleagues. “You know what some people call us: the nasty party.”
The last time the pound was lower was in June 1985, but it has still got a way to fall before hitting its all time low against the dollar of $1.0520, struck on 1 March 1985.
With ReutersLike Mr. Cameron and Boris Johnson, the former London mayor who recently dropped out of the Conservative leadership race, she won a place at Oxford (though some years before them). But while they got there by way of Eton College and joined Oxford’s hedonistic Bullingdon Club, she attended a state secondary school and had a more sedate university career.
But there were no signs that European leaders would let Britain off the hook so easily. Although Ms. Merkel has signaled a desire not to rush the process of negotiating British withdrawal, most European governments are eager to take a tough line, wanting to make clear to any other nation that might contemplate leaving that there is considerable cost to doing so.
Ms. May could not curb arrivals from inside the European Union, who are legally entitled to settle in Britain. But arrivals from outside the bloc, which the government can control, have also remained stubbornly high. Over all, the net figure for 2015 was more than 330,000.
“It is vital the UK retains access to the IEM, which provides stability for energy companies and helps keep household bills down,” said a spokeswoman. “UK energy security depends on gas and electricity from the IEM and it is essential therefore that we take no risks with that. The issue of energy needs to be treated with the highest importance by the government as the negotiations on Britain’s exit begin.”
