Contrast this with the extraordinary degree of mobilisation among Catalan nationalists, who have colonised all the regional power centres, and a subsidised press and civil society. Lower-income citizens vote overwhelmingly for non-secessionist parties such as Ciudadanos (liberal), PSC (social-democrat), Catalunya Sí Que Es Pot (left) and PP (conservative) that today add up to about 48% of the vote, more than the ruling coalition. This bloc is more popular in urban Catalonia, as opposed to the more nationalistic rural interior.
“That makes me really angry,” says Cèsar Sierra, 23, who was born in Cornellà. “They have broken the consensus that wherever we were from and whether we spoke Catalan or Spanish we shared a political context. Now anyone who doesn’t fit their definition of a Catalan is an outsider. That leaves out half of all Catalans.”
“They still have some idea that because they are students, the communist party won’t do something serious to them,” said Alvin Cheng, a 27-year-old protester who attends an Australian university.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
• Aurora Nacarino-Brabo and Jorge San Miguel Lobeto are political scientists, serving as advisers to the Ciudadanos party in the Spanish parliament10. What honor, the United States' highest military decoration, was awarded to 24 individuals at the White House this week?  
A range of senior politicians who have chaired select committees also lined up to criticise China’s decision, including Sir Gerald Kaufman, Sir Malcolm Rifkind, Sir John Stanley and Mike Gapes.
It is worth reminding ourselves of which Catalans have had a role in Spanish politics. It has been, overwhelmingly, the Catalan elites, which brings us to another important detail: Catalan nationalism is neither inclusive nor progressive. Catalonia is inhabited by two cultural communities, each representing about half the population. But in terms of income, social status and influence the difference is stark. The Spanish-speaking population, immigrants or descendants of economic migrants who arrived in the 20th century, is, on average, less wealthy, less educated and less politically mobilised.
Tai said he did not regret helping to start the movement as it had triggered a political awakening in Hong Kong. “In hindsight, I would still do the same thing,” he told the local broadcaster RTHK on Wednesday morning. “I do not repent for what I have done.”
Elsa Artadi, who is running for a seat and is a spokeswoman for Puigdemont's Together for Catalonia campaign, said it had been incredibly difficult to promote the former president and his slate of candidates.
