
It is for this reason, given the seriousness of the situation in Catalonia, that it is my obligation as mayor of its capital, Barcelona, to call on the European commission to open a space for mediation between the Spanish and Catalan governments to find a negotiated and democratic solution to the conflict.
Given that the prosecutor general is also a member of Svoboda, the incident could prove a key test for Ukraine's fledgling government, cobbled together in the aftermath of Yanukovych's flight from Kiev.France Llivia (spain) N20 Estavar N-154 N116 Puigcerda Spain 4 miles FRANCE CATALONIA PORTUGAL Barcelona Madrid SPAIN 200 miles
Professor David Whyte University of Liverpool, Chris Bambery Author of A People’s History of Scotland and co-author of Catalonia Reborn (March 2018), Professor Gilbert Achcar Soas, University of London, Tariq Ali Writer and broadcaster, Professor David Miller University of Bath, Dr Feyzi Ismail Soas, Professor Gregor Gall University of Bradford, Lindsey German Convenor, Stop the War Coalition (personal capacity), Dr Andrew Dowling Author of The Rise of Catalan Independence: Spain’s Territorial Crisis, Professor Bill Bowring Birkbeck College, University of London, Dr John Rees Author of The Leveller Revolution, Russell Mclean Convenor, London Scottish National Party branch (personal capacity)
In a recorded interview distributed by Reuters, Mendez de Vigo said: "It looks as if they proclaimed the republic of Catalonia, but 24 hours after, who has recognized it? No one, that's it."
Colau has accused the Catalan government of “ignoring half the Catalan population”. The day after the national day march , La Vanguardia, the voice of mainstream nationalism and the business community, published an editorial that read: “An assault on the constitution is not the way forward, even though it appeals to hundreds of thousands of people … Half of Catalonia doesn’t support the separatist cause … and many people have yet to recover from the stupor of seeing the methods parliament used last week to pass the so-called disconnection laws.”
After the referendum, the struggle over Catalonia intensified in an often confusing exchange between the Catalan leader, Carles Puigdemont, and Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of Spain. After weeks of equivocating, Mr. Puigdemont told the Spanish authorities that Catalan lawmakers might vote for independence. That was not good enough for Mr. Rajoy, who announced on Saturday that he would remove Catalonia’s leadership.
“It’s not about voting yes or voting no, it’s just about being able to vote democratically,” he said. “That said, I will be bit sad if the no camp wins.”
After Vladimir Putin announced on Tuesday that Russia would absorb Crimea into its fold, attention now turns to the remaining Ukrainian military facilities on the peninsula.
