News of a spike in racial abuse in the days after the referendum led to a social media campaign calling for people to wear safety pins as a sign of solidarity with the country's immigrant population.
.@heliheartland wearing the pin signals my intentions to intervene and report - I can only hope others will do the same. #safetypin — miss pommery 1926 (@cheeahs) June 28, 2016
A string of racially motivated crimes have been reported in post-Brexit Britain. And as police begin investigations into allegations of hate crimes against the foreign-born population around the UK, Twitter user Allison (who goes by the handle @cheeahs ) suggested the simple sign of solidarity.
Explaining the symbolism behind her idea, 30-year-old Allison tells CNN: "There's a woman in a hijab, she gets on the bus and there's an empty seat. She sees that there is a person wearing a safety pin sitting next to it (and) she just knows that she can sit there and they will not hassle her.
"We have had reports and we've seen pictures of notes being pushed through people's doors, describing them as vermin, as scum, and of verbal abuse," Joanna Mludzinska, who runs the London center, told CNN.
"I think those people really lack a sense of empathy for what it must be like to walk into a room or step on a train -- full of strangers -- and you just have to hope that none of them are going to come after you," she says. "I completely agree. It is patronizing if you just wear the pin and think you've done your job."
Some of his English clients, with whom he joked over the years, no longer talk to him. “In one week, you experience that some people you’ve known for three years change their attitudes 180 degrees,” he said.
"I've heard of a small number of people this week saying they feel scared to leave the house ... our message to them is don't give way to bullies and don't suffer in silence. We will protect you."
"From the beginning, I've always said if you're going to wear the safety pin, you've got to back it up. So if you put it on, you are pledging to support people and to intervene and report if you see incidences of racial or xenophobic abuse."
But Allison also has a few choice words for commentators who think the campaign is pointless.
