Russia had objected to previous drafts, and it was unclear whether they would support the la test draft, which was slightly revised after negotiations over the past two days.
Turkey’s deputy prime minister, Tugrul Turkes, told the state-run Anadolu Agency on Thursday that the Russian explanation was “unfulfilling.”
He said it “raises troubling questions if accused people are seen on television or photos bearing clear traces of physical violence. If individual people are humiliated or denigrated in front of the camera.”
It always helps to know a little bit of history on the Korean Peninsula, to see this current event in the historical context. You have to remember that Korea used to be one nation, and it was divided against Koreans’ wishes into a Communist north and a pro-American south at the end of World War II. And that division was vastly unpopular among all Koreans and that was the basis of the war; the war was a war for unification.
The Guardian visited Khan Sheikhun on Thursday and saw the impact point of the shell that contained sarin – a hole on a road metres away from where dozens of those who died in the attack had been asleep in their homes.
"Don't move," a voice warned, according to a recording obtained by YTN. "If you move, it's dangerous. Don't move."
Mr. Tillerson added that the United States had not informed Mr. Putin about the coming missile strikes and that Mr. Trump had not spoken with the Russian leader in the hours afterward.
“The places we targeted were the things that made the airfield operate. It’s the petroleum facilities, it’s the aircraft radar, what they use for takeoff and landing, as well as air-defense radar,” Davis said. “It’s the sites that are specific to making it operate, as well as hangars and aircraft themselves.”
Why did the Syrian government decide to carry out this massacre?
“That’s the best we can hope for,” said an Ankara-based diplomat. “He will have to think very carefully about what he does from here. He is dealing with an unpredictable and volatile US president. That in itself removes the impunity.”