All eyes are on Beijing and how it will respond to the growing waves of protests. The central government is in a tricky situation of not being able to be seen as backing down on its stance but at the same time needing to be wary over the use of force and the implications of doing so.
Russia had been due to begin broadcasting the ceremony for five hours at 4am Monday (3 March) morning Moscow time. Film critic Yury Gladilshchikov, who writes for Moskovskiye Novosti newspaper and would have provided Oscars commentary, said on his Facebook page that the show would be replaced by "a gathering of politicians for the morning programming".
The differences between the two provide a wealth of reasons why they are often at loggerheads -- and no more so than now, with tens of thousands of Hong Kongers taking to the streets to protest what they see as Beijing's undue encroachment into Hong Kong's civil affairs and political structure. 
Hong Kong’s chief executive? That’s right. All the pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong that you’ve been reading about lately? They are calling for CY Leung to be removed from office.
While the island of Hong Kong was ceded in perpetuity following the first Opium War, the bulk of Hong Kong's landmass, the Kowloon peninsula and the New Territories, were leased from China. When the New Territories' lease was due to expire, in 1997, it was decided that the former colony would be returned, in its entirety, to China. 
Protesters in Hong Kong calling for democracy reforms are being targeted by spyware that can affect both iPhones and smartphones running Google’s Android software, a security company claims.
On another occasion he compared the need for public nomination to picking lunch, saying that imposing tight controls on candidates for the role of chief executive was like offering people the chance to eat at one of two shopping centres.
They also called on supporters to attend an assembly at the main protest site in Admiralty on Saturday evening to voice their opposition to the violence.
"The EU and APEC countries, which could in the worst-case scenario support an embargo, accounted for more than 70% of the total Russian export in 2013, or $378bn," said Investcafe analyst Timur Nigmatullin.
The officers broke into applause as Haiduk read them an order from Kiev removing Berezovsky from his position, and told them that Berezovsky was facing treason charges. When Haiduk had finished his dry but compelling address, the officers spontaneously broke into the national anthem, and some were seen to cry. Berezovsky showed no visible sign of emotion.
