The importance of the chirp recorded by LIGO (for Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory) cannot be overstated. It strongly bolsters Einstein’s theory of relativity and it potentially changes the shape of scientific inquiry into the next century, opening whole new fields of astronomical observation. It testifies to the ingenuity and perseverance of the physicists who designed the equipment, and it vindicates an investment of about $1.1 billion over 40 years by the National Science Foundation.
By coincidence, at about the same time that the LIGO discovery was announced, the House passed a bill requiring that National Science Foundation grants be justified “in the national interest.” It is doubtful that LIGO would have survived such political meddling. The bottom line is that whatever else it may be or lead to, the story of the chirp heard round the universe is simply cool. For proof, just listen to that little song.Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, the Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Washingtonon Science, Space and Technology
Chairman, House Committee
LAMAR SMITH
In a Feb. 16 editorial, you criticized my bill, the Scientific Research in the National Interest Act, which recently passed the House requiring the National Science Foundation to explain how each project is worthy of taxpayer funding.
Recently, news broke of the discovery of gravitational waves, as first predicted by Albert Einstein. The National Science Foundation’s support for the LIGO project that led this effort (for Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory) is a perfect example of pursuing breakthrough science that is in the national interest.
Photo
