Mr. Cameron has announced that he will step down, and both his governing Conservative Party and the opposition Labour Party were consumed by internal warfare on Monday, leaving the country lacking strong leadership as it confronted new demands for a referendum on independence for Scotland.
The financial markets continued to pummel stocks and the value of the British pound, at one point sending the currency to its lowest level against the dollar in more than three decades. And Standard & Poor’s, the ratings agency, downgraded Britain’s credit rating, reflecting concern about the economic implications of the so-called Brexit vote.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
(CNN) Nigel Farage, the man who helped orchestrate the United Kingdom's pending exit from the European Union, said in a nearly 10-minute interview with CNN's Richard Quest Tuesday that it's time to "stop the silliness" and get down to work.
Video
“There are concerns about lessening the impact of the British referendum on Japan’s small and medium-sized companies,” Ishihara said.
Meeting in Berlin, Ms. Merkel, President François Hollande of France and Prime Minister Matteo Renzi of Italy said there would be no discussions, formal or informal, over Britain’s withdrawal until it formally invokes Article 50, the provision in the bloc’s governing treaty that sets out the process for a withdrawal.
Energy plan is one of several aimed at boosting SNP’s appeal to rural and leftwing voters after party lost Westminster seats
Photo
"It's very clear that the country is going to be poorer as a result of what's happening to the economy," Osborne told the BBC on Tuesday.
