Russia is using a display of force combined with intense psychological pressure in an attempt to disarm Ukrainian military units in Crimea, according to accounts of several confrontations relayed to the Guardian.
What had been the country’s largest political party, the Party of Regions, led by former President Viktor F. Yanukovych, had its base in the east, but now few representatives are in the government in Kiev. The challenge is to quickly restore the foundations of political authority in the east to build up the interim government’s credibility as an inclusive leadership, willing to recognize Ukraine’s diversity, and in time to slow the centrifugal forces of an emerging pro-Russian uprising in the east.
“We have to raise our bargaining power,” Alex Chow Yong Kang, the secretary general of the Hong Kong Federation of Students, said in an interview. “We have to tell them that Hong Kong people are willing to sacrifice much more.”
Chen declined to give specifics, simply saying "just read what is out there in the Hong Kong media."
Sometimes the censors demonstrated an approach that was at once sophisticated and ham-handed. On Tuesday, CNN broadcasts about the protests were blacked out, but returned abruptly during segments that featured pro-Beijing interview subjects.
Chen was posted to the city in 1994 as a member of the preparatory committee for the formation of Hong Kong as a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China. He was China's point-person in the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG), in charge of negotiating with British side over the 1997 handover of power. He now heads the Chinese Association of Hong Kong and Macao Studies, a think-tank based in Beijing.
Officials said signs of Russian military intervention in Ukraine's Crimean peninsula were clear.
The student strike is the first large-scale gauge, since a modest protest the day the Chinese legislature announced the plan, of how much support pro-democracy groups can muster.
“I’m not afraid,” Mr. Chui said. “I don’t believe the Chinese soldiers will come out. If they do, will they ever get past here? I don’t think so.”"The past few days the central government has already stated many times," he answered tangentially. "We believe that the Hong Kong SAR government has the ability to handle well the illegal acts of the Occupation Central. We fully believe so."
