
The Scottish government says it plans to cut air passenger duty, making it cheaper for international travelers to fly into Scottish airports.
Russian lawmakers have drawn a parallel between Scotland's vote and the referendum held in Ukraine's Crimea region Sunday. 
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Farmers wave estelada flags on top of tractors before Puigdemont’s speech in Barcelona. Photograph: Enric Fontcuberta/EPA
Timeline Eight key moments in the Catalan independence campaign Show Hide Spain’s constitutional court strikes down parts of a 2006 charter on Catalan autonomy that had originally increased the region’s fiscal and judicial powers and described it as a “nation”. The court rules that using the word “nation” has no legal value and also rejects the “preferential” use of Catalan over Spanish in municipal services. Almost two weeks later, hundreds of thousands protest on the streets of Barcelona, chanting “We are a nation! We decide!” At the height of Spain’s economic crisis, more than a million people protest in Barcelona on Catalonia’s national day, demanding independence in what will become a peaceful, annual show of strength. The pro-independence government of Artur Mas defies the Madrid government and Spain’s constitutional court by holding a symbolic vote on independence. Turnout is just 37%, but more than 80% of those who voted - 1.8 million people - vote in favour of Catalan sovereignty. Carles Puigdemont, who has replaced Mas as regional president, announces an independence referendum will be held on 1 October. Spain’s central government says it will block the referendum using all the legal and political means at its disposal. The Catalan parliament approves referendum legislation after a heated, 11-hour session that sees 52 opposition MPs walk out of the chamber in Barcelona in protest at the move. Spain’s constitutional court suspends the legislation the following day, but the Catalan government vows to press ahead with the vote. Police arrest 14 Catalan government officials suspected of organising the referendum and announce they have seized nearly 10 million ballots destined for the vote. Some 40,000 people protest against the police crackdown in Barcelona and Puigdemont accuses the Spanish government of effectively suspending regional autonomy and declaring a de facto state of emergency. Close to 900 people are injured as police attempt to stop the referendum from taking place. The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%. Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic. Spanish prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, fires regional president, Carles Puigdemont, and orders regional elections to be held on 21 December.
As stock markets and the pound continued to decline, Cameron insisted the British economy was robust and could withstand the shockwaves created by the result.
Christine Berry, senior economy & finance researcher at the New Economics Foundation thinktank, said: “Turning [RBS] into a network of local public savings banks could help boost real economy lending while investing in communities that have been left behind by our London-centric economic model – exactly the kinds of communities who voted to Leave. RBS is a public asset that could and should be used to rebalance the UK economy.”
It's not just tourists who may be eyeing potential changes to immigration policy. More than 30,000 international students from more than 150 countries study at institutions in Scotland.
U.K. Treasury chief George Osborne says he wants to take an ax to the country's corporation tax to boost investment in the aftermath of the Brexit vote.
However, Ramón Canela, a 59-year-old IT worker, said he was confident that independence would still happen.
