Crackdown criticized
Ironically, the points system, also used by Canada and New Zealand, was designed to increase immigrant numbers in countries hoping to expand their economies, not to reduce numbers of people coming into a country.
And yet Sevastopol clearly remains significant for Russia. In 2010, Moscow gave Ukraine a good deal on natural gas, partly in exchange for Kiev extending the Russian Navy lease on the base in Ukraine.
Dramatic developments in Turkey reverberated across the Aegean on Monday as eight Turkish soldiers who fled to Greece as the army attempted to overthrow the government in Ankara appeared in court charged with illegally entering the country.
In Vienna, where about 4,000 people demonstrated outside the Turkish embassy on Friday night, the foreign minister, Sebastian Kurz said: “In Austria we have a freedom to demonstrate and that’s a good thing. But I expect of people who live here that they are loyal towards their new home country and respectfully refrain from importing political conflicts into Austria,” said the conservative politician, who is in charge of foreign affairs as well as integration, in an interview with Kronen Zeitung newspaper.
Controversy also surrounded the arrest of Dutch-Turkish journalist Ebru Umar at her family’s holiday home in Kusadasi in April, after she published a column calling Erdoğan a “megalomaniac dictator”. Umar was banned from leaving Turkey for three weeks and still faces charges of insulting the president.
Calling for their extradition, Turkey’s government has been quick to brand them traitors.
“If Erdoğan leaves, we are screwed,” wrote one Syrian. “Let them get to the squares and support [Erdoğan’s supporters] in maintaining democracy.”
Ahmed, the workshop manager, reported being summoned to his local police station a few hours after the coup failed on Saturday. Once there, intelligence officers seemed to be trying to decipher whether he was a threat to the government. They asked about his connections to the Syrian regime and whether he supported the Muslim Brotherhood.
In Istanbul, one Syrian interviewee said he felt under threat not just from Erdoğan’s opponents, but the government, amid a wider crackdown on people perceived to oppose the president.
