The United States and Europe imposed travel bans and froze assets of senior Russian and Crimean officials.
Further muddying the waters, Mr. Puigdemont and separatist lawmakers later signed a declaration of independence, a step set in motion by a highly disputed referendum on Oct. 1 that went ahead despite being suspended by the Spanish Constitutional Court.
Although Puigdemont signed a unilateral declaration of independence last Tuesday, claiming that referendum had given his government a mandate to create a sovereign republic, he proposed that the effects of the declaration be suspended for a few weeks to allow for dialogue.
Vice President Joe Biden, meanwhile, has played the role of administration attack dog by traveling to Poland, Lithuania and Estonia this week to label the Russian move in Crimea a "land grab" and pledge NATO support for former Soviet satellites now part of the alliance.
“The official thesis in Catalonia is that this is a natural, essentially good nation that for at least three centuries has been living in a situation of unsustainable colonial oppression within an artificial, perfidious Spain, from which we must escape,” Joan López Alegre and Nacho Martín Blanco declared.
Nevertheless, Madrid and Barcelona are now locked in a tit-for-tat struggle in which each side accuses the other of anti-democratic behavior.
Mr. Puigdemont sent his latest letter after an emergency meeting of his conservative party late Wednesday, during which lawmakers gave clear support for not withdrawing the declaration of independence, according to local news reports.
While Mr. Puigdemont is facing a fight for his own political survival — hard-line separatists have denounced his failure to deliver a clear message of independence — Mr. Rajoy appears to have consolidated his power base in Madrid, where he has been in charge of a minority government since late 2016.
But within a few months of Russia’s recognition, shivering through the winter behind windows made of plastic sheeting, people began to wonder when the billions of rubles of aid pledged by Russia would reach them. The answer seems to have been that much of it was stolen: Mr. Malashenko said he estimated that 30 percent of the aid pledged by Russia had reached its target.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
