“A campaign against intellectuals has been growing since 2013, but people used to believe it would blow over,” said a spokesperson for Germany’s Foundation for Dialogue and Education, an institute with close ties to the Hizmet movement. “Now many of them are fearing for their lives.”
He said it “raises troubling questions if accused people are seen on television or photos bearing clear traces of physical violence. If individual people are humiliated or denigrated in front of the camera.”
Putin stands by Assad as firm evidence of chemical attack mounts Read more
Bilgin Ayata, a political scientist, told the German news agency DPA that the exodus could echo one in 1980. “We are looking at the imprisonment of 6,000 people, mass suspensions and a debate about the reintroduction of the death penalty. If things continue in that vein, many Turkish citizens will leave the country, as they did after the military coup in 1980,” Ayata said.
Insecurity among the academic community in Turkey is particularly high as Gülen helped boost participation in Turkish higher education in the 1970s and 80s, meaning many now find themselves accused of harbouring sympathies for his Hizmet movement.
German authorities believe there is a growing likelihood that thousands of Turks could apply for political asylum in the coming weeks or months, potentially creating a new influx of refugees this summer.
Doctors and aid workers who had examined the wounded of last week’s massacre, which provoked the first US military strikes against the regime of Bashar al-Assad, said they exhibited symptoms of exposure to a nerve agent similar to sarin, as well as a second chemical that may have been chlorine.
It was the first time the White House had ordered military action against forces loyal to Mr. Assad.
"Pretty much every law, rule, regulation and standard throughout the world says that yes, the captain must stay with the ship until all personnel are safely off of the ship, certainly passengers."
TRUMP: He’s been complimentary of me. I think Putin and I will get along very well.
