Pro-democracy demonstrators seized back part of Hong Kong's bustling Mong Kok district Saturday after a night of scuffles. 
The main question burning in the minds of most Hong Kongers is how this will all end – and almost everyone involved can surmise a worst-case scenario. Hong Kong’s former security chief Regina Ip said on Monday that the city government fears a “mini-Tiananmen” – presumably that the protests would be violently dispersed, perhaps by the Chinese military. Nobody wants to see a repeat of 4 June 1989, when Beijing dispatched the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) to open fire on peaceful pro-democracy protesters. The PLA maintains a garrison in Hong Kong, but Leung said in a televised address on Monday morning that the Hong Kong government would not call in the troops. Chinese state media has also emphasised the central government’s confidence in Hong Kong authorities to deal with the protests themselves. That said, the protests continue to escalate, and Beijing seems ready to stand its ground, no matter what the cost.
On a recent afternoon, art teacher Josephine Lau sat in the middle of the highway now occupied by students, painting yellow ribbons onto Chinese paper.  She hoped her posters would prove more durable than previous slogans she had made, which were washed away by rainstorms last week.
Hong Kong, one of the world’s most important financial hubs, has exploded into protest. Since Sunday night, the so-called “umbrella revolution” has turned the city’s gleaming central business district into a virtual conflict zone, replete with shouting mobs, police in riot gear, and clouds of tear gas. Tens of thousands of Hong Kong residents – young and old, rich and poor – have peacefully occupied major thoroughfares across the city, shuttering businesses and bringing traffic to a halt. They claim that Beijing reneged on an agreement to grant them open elections by 2017, and demand “true universal suffrage”. Organisers said on Monday that the protest would not end until Beijing changes its electoral guidelines and Leung Chun-Ying, the city’s pro-Beijing chief executive, steps down. Neither side seems prepared to back off, and nobody knows how the standoff will end.
Britain should be doing more to help the governments of Hong Kong and China settle the situation, he said, calling on Hong Kong’s leaders to offer more concessions to the protesters to encourage them to back down.In an early morning video statement addressed to all Hong Kong residents, Hong Kong Chief Executive C.Y. Leung called for people to leave. He said police have exercised the greatest possible restraint in dealing with the protesters.
All these are enshrined in our Basic Law. These additional powers are devolved from the Central People's Government. This is why the central government has the power to appoint the chief executive as well as principal officials.  
Today, less than 10% of people support the idea of immediate or eventual reunification -- a figure that has declined consistently over the years. Results of a survey by National Chengchi University in June found that 60% of respondents identified as Taiwanese -- an historic high -- compared to just 3.5% as Chinese. A clear majority supports the political status quo of de facto independence. 
"We've had a lot of people calling in, they are terrified, they want to keep their oath but they don't know what is happening and are worried about getting proper support from Kiev," he said.
"The protesters are unhappy because Hong Kong is becoming more and more like China," Chinese tourist, 24-year old Liujing, from Hainan, told CNN at spillover protests in the Mong Kok region of Kowloon. "I support them because growing up, we always admired Hong Kong. If Hong Kong became like China then that would be a real shame."
