Campaigning in Catalonia’s 21 December regional election begins officially on Tuesday. Opinion polls show pro- and anti-independence political parties running neck and neck. But the outcome will shape the future not just of Catalonia and Spain but of other European nations and EU institutions.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman responded to earlier claims of hacking by Deep Panda from CrowdStrike by saying: “Some US internet security firms turn a blind eye to the threat posed by the US to other countries through the internet and are bent on stirring things up by constantly talking about ‘China Internet Threat’. The so-called evidence they produce is untenable and not worth commenting on.”
The payments to Hui were said to have been made via a series of complicated transactions involving middlemen.
8. What kind of vehicle is the U.S. Navy's P-8 Poseidon, which is being used to hunt for the missing Malaysia Airlines passenger plane?
MADRID — In his first visit to Catalonia since taking control of the restive region in Spain, Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy on Sunday urged Catalans to vote in next month’s elections to defeat the independence movement and return the region to “normality.”
Mr. Zoido firmly rejected separatist claims that Mr. Junqueras and others should be considered to be political prisoners. “They are politicians who are imprisoned because they have committed very serious crimes,” he told reporters on Monday.
Q&A Why does the Spanish government say the Catalan referendum is illegal? Show Hide The Spanish government argues that any referendum on Catalan independence would be illegal because the country’s 1978 constitution makes no provision for a vote on self-determination. The Spanish constitutional court, which has suspended the referendum law pushed through the Catalan parliament in September, is looking into whether the law breaches the constitution. In March this year, the former Catalan president Artur Mas was banned from holding public office for two years after being found guilty of disobeying the constitutional court by holding a symbolic independence referendum three years ago.
(CNN) The day after elections in Catalonia deepened the split between its separatist parties and the Spanish government, both sides are in a defiant mood.
How did Catalonia get here?
Photo
