As authorities searched for answers, heartbroken family members of the missing gathered in Jindo, about 20 kilometers (12 miles) from the site where the ferry sank.
• With the polls indicating that the possibility of a vote to leave the EU is looming larger, it is natural that thoughts should turn to the issue of how we would cope with the changes that would ensue. The post-Brexit changes to laws, government spending, taxes, prices, jobs, etc would be significant and would affect everyone in the UK, many of them for the worse. I believe therefore that we would need a coalition government for a few years during the Brexit process until things have settled down. This coalition should include all the major UK political parties. It would be quite wrong if the important decisions about post-Brexit changes are made by one political group, especially the relatively rightwing faction who are driving the leave campaign.
The ship’s departure from Incheon on Tuesday evening was delayed by two hours because of heavy fog, officials said. It was also carrying 150 cars and trucks, below its capacity of 180.
"The master of the ship, the captain, may well have determined that the vessel was going to remain level and might sink at a steady rate that would allow for the safe exit of people off of the vessel using life rafts, for example, and that would be the preferred way to go," he said. "It may well be that the announcement was made while the captain was under the impression that the vessel was not going to sink quickly. And that events overtook their ability to communicate a change in direction to the passengers."
At 8am on Saturday, there were still tanks on the Bosphorus Bridge. They stood on the tarmac that links Istanbul’s Asian and European shores, their turrets pointing at jaunty angles – as they had since 9pm on Friday, when their sudden appearance gave the first hint that a coup was under way.
Pictures also circulated of corpses, the remains of those who were allegedly mowed down by tank missiles in Ankara. Helicopter gunships were filmed shooting at protesters, while the parliament was left a blackened wreck by overnight blasts. One unverified photograph appeared to suggest a rebel soldier had been decapitated.
Elsewhere in Istanbul and around the country, at least 47 civilians had died as protesters clashed with the instigators of the coup and sometimes swarmed military vehicles. Some of the clashes ended peacefully, with loyalist police officers and journalists filmed capturing rebel soldiers after the latter tried to take over a television station.
Those campaigning for the U.K. to stay -- including the government -- paint a much grimmer picture of life outside the EU. They say trade and investment would suffer, triggering a recession, killing jobs, slamming the pound and causing house prices to fall.
Speaking at the headquarters of the Ministry of Security and Public Administration, she said, “We must do our best to rescue even one of those passengers and students who may not have escaped from the ship.”
For The Sun, The Express and The Mail, the influx of European immigrants into Britain, largely from Central and Eastern Europe, has frequently been a front-page story, one that chimes with the most potent argument for those campaigning to quit the bloc.
