Marinaki said she had asked that all eight remain in detention for security reasons.
For the last two months, Mr. Pereverziev has been the commander of what he called the 16th regiment of the Maidan self-defense forces. He said there were about 40 such “regiments” — with about 100 troops, they are more like companies — created over the past three months, and their commanders are called Sotnyks, an old Cossack rank roughly equivalent to a captain in the Ukrainian army. His wife commands a smaller women’s division.
The attempted coup had barely been foiled when Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, called the Greek prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, to demand that the men be speedily returned.
“Politically and diplomatically it is a hot potato for Greece,” the defence expert Thanos Dokos told the Guardian. “This is a government that is sensitive to human rights issues but also knows that the cost of not sending them back could be great. Ultimately much will depend on whether the death penalty is reinstated [in Turkey].”
As for Russia, Mr. Pereverziev says he thinks that Moscow’s efforts to meddle in Ukraine “to escalate the situation” will fail, especially given that the Tatars, the ethnic minority indigenous to Crimea, support a united Ukraine. “Russia has nothing to offer us except fuel and energy,” he said. “And in the time of shale gas, soon we won’t need them.”
As Turks waited to see in which direction their mercurial and powerful leader would steer the country in the wake of the coup attempt, Mr. Erdogan struck some conciliatory notes on Sunday. Yet he has also raised the possibility that Turkey would reinstate the death penalty, which it had abolished as a part of its pursuit to join the European Union.
Some 300 people gather in Istanbul's Taksim Square, some waving Turkish flags. Army tanks and a military vehicle sit at the square.
With officials in crisis-hit Greece also concerned about the ability of Turkish authorities to stop new waves of migrants pouring into the country following the coup, Athens has attempted to walk a middle line.
Video
Gunfire rings out as a confused nation watches.
