As ideological battle lines are drawn around the world over the situation, leaders are painting vastly different pictures of the realities on the ground. 
The remarks were the latest in a series of fast-moving developments that saw Ukrainian officials grappling with rising secessionist passions in the Russian-majority region, where the airspace has been closed and communications have been disrupted. 
Putin's envoy to Kiev refused to sign the latest truce between Yanukovych and the opposition, in which they agreed on early elections and a return to a constitution that would shift more power from the president to the Parliament.
Also, a bipartisan group of 12 senators from the Foreign Relations Committee expressed support for U.S. assistance in Ukraine and warned of Russian intervention.
The vice president's visit comes two days before European Union leaders will meet in Brussels for talks certain to include the Ukraine crisis.
What's more, in the Brezhnev era the expansionist policies of the military industrial complex were a result of the oil prosperity. After the 1973 oil crisis its prices reached 41 dollars a barrel by 1981. They provided some material comforts to the Soviets, fueled their belief in the USSR's stability and strength. Similarly, with oil at around $100 a barrel in recent decades, the GDP growth under Putin -- up 8% until just a few years ago -- allowed Russians to live well like never before, also cultivating a sense of superiority. The success of the Sochi Olympics last month has only made it greater. 
After Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov had presented the treaty and urged lawmakers to accept the region as a part of the Russian Federation, the document was approved on a vote of 443 to 1.
Meanwhile, Russia and Putin are getting into deeper isolation from the world as more and more countries are recalling their ambassadors from Russia and condemning the government's actions. 
Demartino quoted Mohyliov as saying the responsibility for Crimea's future stability rests with parliament. 
In Kharkiv, a tense rift has opened up between those who want to tear down the city's Lenin statue, one of the biggest in the country, and those who want to keep it.
