Studying in Moscow was a coveted privilege, and thousands of Syrians brought back Russian wives, many still here despite the war. Half of the university professors here were educated in Russia. Among Syria’s government and opposition alike are Soviet-era alumni who speak Russian fluently and fondly remember their days as students in Moscow.
The evacuation process resumed after the bombing, the Observatory said, with the residents of Fua and Kefraya eventually arriving in Aleppo, Syria’s second city that the government took full control of last year.
Russia had offered Ukraine a $15 billion loan and cut in natural gas prices in November, but that deal seems unlikely to remain on the table if Ukraine turns toward Europe.
Ukraine's navy commander, detained when supporters of Russia took over the naval headquarters in Crimea, was released, the presidential website said Thursday.
Just before Obama spoke, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Samantha Power, called for an "urgent international" mediation mission to Crimea.
It has $10 billion in assets and handles the accounts of some top government officials, the Treasury said, adding that the bank has relationships with banks in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere. The bank also provides services to the oil, gas and energy sectors, it said.
The statement also hinted that Russian forces could intervene in eastern Ukraine to protect Russians there, the same justification used for sending troops to occupy key facilities in Crimea.
Those in favor of moving argued that unemployment and inflation were close to levels the Fed regarded as healthy, and waiting could cause the economy to overheat. In their view, the minutes said, “taking another step in removing monetary accommodation should not be delayed too long.”
Concerns were heightened in the Crimea region when the Crimean Parliament convened a previously unscheduled session Wednesday, amid local media reports that secession might be on the agenda.
What’s the atmosphere like in Independence Square, Kiev and the rest of the country?
