Facebook Twitter Pinterest Rescue workers scaled the side of the ferry to reach trapped passengers.
More than 270 people are still unaccounted for as efforts continue to rescue passengers aboard a South Korean ferry that sank off the country’s south-west coast on Wednesday morning.
Officials said six of the ship’s 462 passengers had died, at least 55 are injured and 179 have been rescued. Many passengers - of which 300 are children - may have been trapped inside the vessel as it listed and sank.
A total of 277 people remained missing.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Rescue workers retrieve survivors.

Dozens of coastguard and navy vessels were battling to rescue passengers, including 325 high school pupils and their teachers. A major rescue operation is now underway involving more than 30 coastguard and military ships, as well as about a dozen helicopters.
Authorities said the dead included a female crew member in her early 20 and two male high school students. A coast guard officer confirmed a fourth fatality but had no immediate details about it.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest South Korean coastguards on the rescue operation around the stricken passenger ferry Sewol on Wednesday. Photograph: Yonhap/EPA

There were conflicting reports throughout the morning of the number of people who had been rescued. Four hours after the accident, Yonhap said 368 people had been confirmed as safe, including 13 injured, with a further 107 unaccounted for.
The Sewol, a car and passenger ferry, sent out a distress signal shortly before 9am local time. The 6,852-tonne vessel had been en route from the western port of Incheon to the southern resort island of Jeju, located about 100 kilometres (60 miles) off the mainland, when it reportedly hit rocks and began listing severely.


Early reports by some South Korean media indicated that all 338 high school pupils and their teachers were safe following a huge rescue operation involving civilian and military vessels, and helicopters.
But as reports emerged that two people were dead, YTN, a major TV network, withdrew the report and said it had yet to confirm the safety of all of the members of the school party.
The area had been shrouded in fog overnight, leading to the cancellation of many ferry services to islands. But news reports said visibility in the area was fair on Wednesday morning.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Coastguards rescuing passengers and crew aboard the South Korean ferry Sewol which sank on Wednesday on its way to Jeju island from Incheon. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images
Passenger testimony indicated that the ship had struck rocks about 20 km off the coast of Byungpoong island.

"We heard a big thumping sound and the boat stopped," one passenger told the YTN by telephone. "The boat is tilting and we have to hold on to something to stay seated."
Another told the network that at least one helicopter had reached the vessel, adding that other passengers had remained in their cabins soon after the accident but were having trouble keeping their balance.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest An injured passenger is stretchered by rescue personnel after ferry Sewol sank in waters off South Korea on Wednesday. Photograph: Yonhap/EPA
Other reports said passengers had been told to put on lifejackets and jump into the sea amid fears that the vessel was on the verge of sinking. News footage showed that at least one lifeboat aboard the ferry had been deployed.
"The ship is taking in water and sinking," a coastguard spokesman told AFP by phone as the rescue operation got under way. "There are around 450 people on board and we have coastguard vessels, commercial ships in the area, as well as helicopters all engaged in the rescue operation," the spokesman added.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Rescued passengers, wrapped in blankets, being brought onto land in Jindo after the ferry disaster. Photograph: Yonhap/AFP/Getty Images
A total of 18 helicopters and 34 rescue boats have been sent to the area, Lee Gyeong-og, a government vice minister, told a televised news conference. He added that the South Korean president, Park Geun-hye had urged rescue teams to do their utmost to save everyone on board.
The pupils, from Danwon high school in Ansan city near Seoul, were on their way to Jeju, a popular tourist destination, for a four-day study trip. The ship left Incheon port on Tuesday evening, according to
local maritime officials, and was due to arrive at Jeju later on Wednesday.
Dramatic images on South Korean TV showed the capsized ship tilted 45 degrees on its port side. Later, the vessel appeared to have inverted and was almost completely submerged.