After the ferry was raised last week, it was positioned on its side on a large barge-like vessel as salvage crews drained it before taking it to a nearby port for a closer inspection.
On Tuesday, they found six bones, a shoe and other personal items, which had apparently washed out of the ferry as it was being drained.
Government forensic experts were sent to the scene to collect the remains.
Most of the victims were students from Danwon High School in Ansan, south of Seoul, who had boarded the ferry for a trip to an island. The nine who are still missing include four students and two teachers from the school.
The sinking, one of the country’s worst disasters, was a deeply traumatizing experience for South Koreans.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
When the Sewol capsized, its crew members were among the first to flee, after repeatedly telling passengers to stay in their cabins. As the ship slowly went under, teenagers trapped inside sent text messages begging for help or saying goodbye to their families.
Confusing news reports and official announcements at the time added to South Koreans’ pain over the disaster. Local news outlets initially reported that all on board the Sewol had been rescued. And the government kept releasing conflicting information on the number of people on board and the number of those rescued.
Bereaved families had demanded that the ship be salvaged, hoping that the bodies of the missing would be found inside.
“Eun-hwa! Hang in there just a bit more, so we can go home together,” Lee Geum-hee said in tears on Tuesday, throwing yellow roses into the sea. Her daughter, Cho Eun-hwa, a Danwon student, was one of the nine missing.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Around the time the bones were found, Ms. Lee and others with missing relatives joined emotional religious services on a boat near the Sewol, during which Catholic pastors, Protestant ministers and Buddhist monks prayed for the recovery of the nine’s remains.
“Please support us until I can hold my daughter’s hands and finally go home,” said Park Eun-mi, the mother of another missing student, Heo Da-yun, according to pool reports by South Korean journalists at the scene.
Ever since the ferry’s sinking, relatives of the missing have camped out at a nearby pier, in hopes that their loved ones’ remains would eventually be found. On Tuesday, friends and supporters of the families gathered there and released yellow balloons into the sky wishing for a successful recovery.