As a result, Europe, the largest economy in the world, finds itself helpless in a confrontation with a country that, in economic terms and excluding the energy sector, belongs in the global third division.
The swirl of opinions, analyses and interests can be bewildering, especially in contrast to an essentially simple calculation by Russia. Unlike the West, it values geopolitical expansion, not economic conditions. Otherwise, Russia would invest the money it earns from oil and gas in economic development, and not in its military, which according to projected spending will account for well over a quarter of the national budget by 2015.
This situation casts a dark shadow on the place where the Iron Curtain used to be. “Old Europe” is not threatened, and so it can focus on its own economic interests, while “New Europe” is reminded of the nightmares of its past. The fact that Ukrainians were willing to die in order to open the door to the European Union, which is now unwilling to bear the economic costs of a confrontation with Russia in order to protect them, is hardly comforting.
In a threatening situation, it is natural to seek out allies who find themselves in a similar position. Unfortunately, Eastern Europe is even more divided by economic interests than the European Union as a whole. Hungary, Slovakia and Bulgaria are more energy dependent on Russia than any other countries in the European Union, while the Czechs value their local “splendid isolation” in the warmth of Germany and Austria.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Poland has common interests only with the Baltic countries. But because of their weakness, as well as Lithuania’s historic distrust of Poland, such an alliance doesn’t get anyone anywhere. And Romania, the second-largest country in “New Europe” after Poland, lacks strong ties to anyone.
This explains why Poland bears such love for Ukraine. At this past Saturday’s party convention in advance of the May elections to the European Parliament, the Polish prime minister and leader of the Civic Platform party, Donald Tusk, said, “The fundamental security of Poland and Europe depends on these elections.” The campaign slogan for Mr. Tusk’s party will be “A Strong Poland Within a Secure Europe.”
The key to that strength and security is Ukraine. As Mr. Tusk told the Ukrainian protest leader Vitali Klitschko, a special guest at the convention, “Everyone who wants a secure Poland within a united Europe has to keep his fingers crossed for Ukraine.”
The foreign press is writing a lot about Poland, which, thanks to its engagement in Ukraine, has strengthened its international position, especially compared with the rest of the European Union. Nevertheless, Poland’s security depends on the strength of the union, and so seems more threatened than at any point since the fall of Communism.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Not only is there a lot to lose, but there is also more to gain than ever in our modern history. If Ukraine survives in its current shape (even without Crimea) and enters a path similar to that followed by Poland, the human and economic potential of both countries, strengthened by ad hoc alliances within the European Union, will allow the realization of Poland’s historical dream to balance Russia’s role in the region and ensure a significant position for Eastern Europe within the West.
Today, though, this scenario seems unlikely. Not counting the risks associated with Russian expansion and the West’s dilatory attitude, corrupt habits and social divisions within Ukraine are a major obstacle. Another obstacle may be the West itself, which, if it presses for too-severe economic reforms in exchange for too-paltry economic assistance, may well bring the same people out into the Maidan.
And even if this can be overcome, in the end Poland and Ukraine, rather than finding mutual love for each other, might well start a war over historical memory, for which neither lacks pretexts. We have seen the history books reopened on Crimea; there is no reason they cannot be reopened on Polish-Ukrainian tensions as well.
Slawomir Sierakowski is a sociologist and a founder of the Krytyka Polityczna movement. This article was translated by Maria Blackwood from the Polish.