The deputy already had attracted the ire of social media two days earlier, after a photograph circulated of him sitting while Russia’s entire political elite listening to Mr. Putin’s speech was on their feet. He was accused of sitting through the national anthem, which he denied.
Anticipating his vote in the Duma, colleagues seated near him offered what he called friendly advice not to do it, warning him “Don’t ruin your career” or “Putin will crush you,” he said.
After the Duma vote, there was an immediate barrage of attacks on Twitter and elsewhere condemning him as a “national traitor” and a “fifth columnist.” It was suggested that he emigrate, or that he be crucified.
Mr. Ponomarev anticipated immediate censure, but the only official reaction in the Duma so far has been an indirect reference by Vladimir Zhirinovsky, a nationalist party leader, who warned darkly that Russia needed to be vigilant against fifth columnists everywhere, even in the Duma. There have been vague threats of expulsion, as well.
Mr. Ponomarev, who holds degrees in science and management, has fallen afoul of fellow deputies before on other issues, including speaking out against the government at street protests in 2012 and not wearing a tie.
When the Parliament took another symbolic vote, demanding that Western nations imposing sanctions on Russia include all Duma members, the deputies around him also complained about his choice, he said.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
“They were whining, saying: ‘We cannot visit our houses in Italy. Where we will spend our vacations? You bastard, you didn’t vote. You will be allowed into Europe, we will not’ — stuff like that,” he said.
Mr. Ponomarev, running for mayor of Novosibirsk, braced for worse from his constituents when he went home this week to campaign. “The overwhelming majority of people say that Crimea is Russia, there is no doubt,” he said. “It is a virtually unanimous opinion.”
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
But when he explained that he voted because he wanted to avoid war, that the annexation should have been negotiated, about half the small knots of 15 to 20 voters he addressed on the streets usually came around, he said. Women in particular accepted the antiwar message, while men, even if they disagreed with the vote, warmed to the idea that he had defied the government line, Mr. Ponomarev said.
“Siberia is a place like the Wild West in the U.S., where people like to challenge the government, so they called me brave,” he said, laughing.
But on Friday his mayoral campaign became a victim of his vote. The five opposition candidates for mayor decided to pick just one in order to consolidate their forces. He decided to withdraw, he said, partly because his lone “no” vote might have been used effectively by the ruling party to keep the mayor’s office.
There is one small comfort, he said: Duma members are immune from prosecution.