Amid the turmoil in Crimea, Arsen Avakov, Ukraine’s acting interior minister, called for calm in a posting on his Facebook page, saying that unspecified measures were “being taken to counter the extremist actions and prevent an escalation of an armed conflict in the center of the city.”
But it was unclear how much authority Mr. Avakov has over the police and other state services in Crimea, where a heavily ethnic Russian and Russian-speaking population mostly views the Ukrainian government installed after the ouster last weekend of Mr. Yanukovych as the illegitimate result of a fascist coup.
“Provocateurs are on the march,” Mr. Avakov added. “It’s a time for cool heads, the healthy consolidation of forces, and careful action.”
Outside the occupied legislature building, columns of several hundred pro-Russia protesters forced their way through police lines chanting “Rossiya, Rossiya” — “Russia, Russia” — and waving Russian flags. The leader of a group called the Russian Movement for Crimea read out Mr. Yanukovych’s reported statement declaring himself to be the legitimate president. “We agree, we agree,” the crowd shouted. One man shouted through a bullhorn: “We are not separatists. Russia, Ukraine and Belarus are one country.”
As the standoff unfolded, the entrance to the Crimean Parliament was barricaded with wooden boxes, metal garbage skips and other objects. Most streets in Simferopol were empty of traffic after the authorities ordered a citywide holiday, and the Crimean legislature called an emergency session for Friday afternoon.
Video
Refat Chubarov, a member of the assembly and a leader of Crimea’s ethnic Tatar minority, said he had not been informed about the session and warned that any vote to separate Crimea from Ukraine would be “very dangerous.” Asserting that Russian armored vehicles were waiting outside the city, he called for calm but also urged Tatar residents to form “self-defense” units to protect their interests.
He blamed pro-Russia forces for the overnight seizure of government buildings, describing the action as “a direct interference in the affairs of Crimea and of Ukraine.”
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
The overnight raids left Simferopol residents stunned and took place just hours after thousands of Crimean Tatars, the region’s minority indigenous Turkic population, and a separate throng of ethnic Russians staged dueling rallies Thursday outside Crimea’s regional legislature. The rallies, which ended in a chaotic melee and left several people injured, disrupted a session of the regional Parliament that hard-line pro-Russia groups had hoped would declare Crimea’s secession from Ukraine.
“This is the first step toward civil war,” said Igor Baklanov, a computer expert who joined a group of anxious residents gathered in a cold drizzle at a police line near the seized regional legislature. Rumors swirled of Russian troops on the way from Sevastopol, the headquarters of Russia’s fleet, of Russian nationalists arriving in force to reinforce the blockaded government buildings and of negotiations between the local authorities and the unidentified gunmen.
“Nobody knows who, what or why,” said a resident who identified himself only as Gennady and who voiced alarm that the armed action could set off a spiral of violence in a region riven by political, ethnic and religious differences.
The developments came as the authorities in Kiev and Moscow traded bellicose warnings. Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov of Russia was quoted as saying that his country would defend its compatriots in Ukraine “uncompromisingly,” and officials in Kiev were said to tell the Russian military to remain within its Crimean naval base.
Failure to remain on the base “will be considered a military aggression,” Ukraine’s acting president, Oleksandr V. Turchynov, told the national Parliament, news reports said.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Russian news agencies quoted military officials as saying Russian warplanes had been ordered onto “combat alert,” although that appeared to be in connection with large-scale military exercises announced earlier this week.
As the crisis deepened, Reuters said, the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry summoned the ranking Russian representative in Ukraine to call for immediate consultations with Moscow after the seizure of the Crimean regional government and Parliament buildings.
A diplomatic note handed to the Russian envoy, Andrei Vorobyov, requested that the Russian military based in the Crimean port of Sevastopol stay on base, Reuters reported.
The events came a day after thousands of protesters in Simferopol, the capital of Ukraine’s Crimea region and a tinderbox of ethnic, religious and political divisions, clashed in the tumultuous struggle for Ukraine that drove the president from power last weekend and that has pushed Russia and the West into a face-off reminiscent of the Cold War.
Photo
Eight hundred miles away, President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia ordered a surprise military exercise of ground and air forces on Ukraine’s doorstep on Wednesday, adding to the tensions with Europe and the United States and underscoring his intention to keep Ukraine in Moscow’s orbit.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Taken together, the events illustrated the continuing challenges that the new government in Kiev faces in calming separatism at home and placating a frustrated Russian leader who sees Ukraine as a vital part of his strategy to rebuild Russian influence not along the lines of the former Soviet Union, but of the czars. While few analysts expected a Russian military intervention in Ukraine, most said that Mr. Putin was likely to respond in some fashion to such a stinging geopolitical defeat.
The question was how, and on Wednesday he provided a first answer, when Russia’s military put tens of thousands of troops in western Russia on alert at 2 p.m. for an exercise scheduled to last until March 3. The minister of defense, Sergei K. Shoigu, also announced unspecified measures to tighten security at the headquarters of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet on the Crimean Peninsula.
Senior defense and government officials later said that the exercise was not related to the events in Ukraine, which officials here have watched with growing alarm, but they also said that there was no reason to postpone them either, and the geopolitical message was clear.
The orders came as thousands of ethnic Russians gathered outside the regional Parliament in Crimea’s capital, Simferopol, to protest the political upheaval in Ukraine’s capital, Kiev, that felled the government of Mr. Yanukovych over the weekend and turned him into a fugitive. Crimea was Russian territory until the Soviet Union ceded it to the Soviet Socialist Republic of Ukraine in 1954, and Russians there have already pleaded for the Kremlin’s intervention to protect the region from Ukraine’s new leadership.
The military maneuvers were widely seen as saber-rattling by a Kremlin that has spent a decade or more trying to extinguish separatist sentiments in the North Caucasus and elsewhere. They nevertheless elicited new warnings from Western governments, notably the United States, which reminded Russia of its own admonishments to the West about its military interventions in Libya and other nations.
Speaking to a small group of reporters in Washington, Secretary of State John Kerry said it was important for the Russians “to heed those warnings as they think about options in the sovereign nation of Ukraine.”
Mr. Kerry did not specify what the United States was prepared to do in response to a Russian military intervention, focusing instead on what he said the Russians would sacrifice.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
“I think it would cost them hugely in the world, where they are trying to assert a sort of greater legitimacy with respect to their diplomacy,” he said.
Mr. Kerry also said that the United States was considering a $1 billion package of loan guarantees to Ukraine, as well as direct aid to the Ukrainian government, to help address the deepening economic crisis there.
Russia has refused so far to recognize the legitimacy of the new political powers in Ukraine’s Parliament, and denounced their actions since Mr. Yanukovych’s flight as inflammatory and divisive, including what the Foreign Ministry described on Wednesday as discrimination toward Russian Orthodox believers. Two days earlier Prime Minister Dmitri A. Medvedev said the turmoil posed “a real threat to our interests and to our citizens’ lives and health.”
Mr. Putin himself has yet to make public remarks on the crisis in Ukraine, but senior officials have vowed not to interfere directly and called on the United States and Europe to do the same. Even so, the public clamor of ethnic Russians in Crimea and eastern Ukraine has raised fears that Russia could be provoked to intervene.