Mariano Rajoy warns that a UK withdrawl from the EU would have negative consequences for everyone
British expats could forfeit their rights to live in Spain if they vote to leave the EU, the Spanish prime minister has warned, saying forgoing free movement rights would be “negative for everyone”.

More than 400,000 British citizens live and work in Spain, while 100,000 Spanish citizens live in the UK, Mariano Rajoy said.
“I have no doubt whatsoever, as I have repeatedly stated, that it would be very negative if the United Kingdom left the European Union. Negative for everybody, for the United Kingdom, for Spain, and for the European Union,” Rajoy told Spanish news agency EFE.
“But, above all, it would be very negative for British citizens: the European Union is based, ever since its foundation, on the principles of freedom of movement of people, goods, services and capitals.”
EU referendum live: Cameron and Corbyn make case for Remain – separately Read more
UK citizens, he said, would forfeit crucial rights to live and work across the continent. “Leaving the European Union would mean that British citizens would lose their right to move freely, work and do business within the largest economic area, the largest market in the world,” he said.
“If the United Kingdom left the European Union, it would be very negative for everyone and from every perspective.”
British expats in Spain, many of them retired, have expressed concern about access to healthcare after a potential leave vote. UK citizens are entitled to healthcare via the European health insurance card or free health insurance from the Spanish government under EU law, but Spain would not be obliged to continue to offer free healthcare to non-EU citizens.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Mariano Rajoy. Photograph: Juan Medina/Reuters
Rajoy’s comments came after the Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, warned that a pledge by Brexit campaigners’ to enact a points-based immigration system would mean British citizens would face similar barriers to travel and work in Europe.
“It would be unavoidable, inevitable, for us and I think for many of us in Europe to follow the same proposals to implement a points system also in the rest of the European Union,” he told BBC News.
“So you would get a race to the bottom and that’s exactly what you don’t want.”
Leave campaigners have argued that new rights for British citizens to live and work in other EU countries could be negotiated after Brexit.
Free movement and its effects on migration to the UK is one of the key issues for voters, according to new polling conducted by Vote Leave, which found almost half of those surveyed said levels of migration from the other 27 EU countries had been bad for the UK, against 26% who thought it had benefited Britain.