Some buyers have pulled out of deals, while others are attempting to renegotiate prices after UK voted to leave EU
Homebuyers spooked by the UK’s decision to leave the EU are pulling out of deals or attempting to renegotiate prices, according to property professionals, as the housing market suffers Brexit vote aftershocks.
One property developer in central London, which had offered a “Brexit clause” allowing nervous buyers to pull out of deals in the event of a leave vote said it was allowing buyers to withdraw and keep their deposits. David Humbles, managing director of the luxury Two Fifty One development, said: “We can confirm that a few purchasers have decided not to proceed given the uncertainty of the market. However, the majority are continuing with their purchase and the marketing strategy to offer the pledge at the launch was a worthwhile exercise.”
Consulting group KPMG has forecast that prices could fall by 5% outside London, and more in the capital, while commentators said a slowdown in sales which started ahead of the referendum was likely to continue. Fearful of landing in immediate negative equity, some buyers have decided to put their purchases on ice.
A buying agent who specialises in finding homes for the well-off said two clients had pulled out of deals as soon as the result was known, while another had reduced their offer. “I suspect that turnover will shrink and prices will fall – by 10% perhaps by Christmas,” said Henry Pryor in a blog post. Pryor, who added that another client had exchanged contracts with a Brexit clause, meaning they could pull out if the UK voted to leave, but it was unclear whether they would invoke it.
Andrew Montlake from mortgage broker Coreco said the firm had received “an initial flurry of calls from clients wondering if they should put things on ice”, and that a small number had decided to put purchases on hold.
First-time buyer Josh Morris said he was considering pulling out of his purchase – a property in Liverpool which he put an offer on earlier this month. On Thursday Morris spent a long time on the phone to the mortgage broker, who arranged to call back at lunchtime on Friday to go through some details. Instead he called at 9.30am saying he should set the ball rolling but Morris said that he and his wife, a doctor, were now reconsidering. “If I buy and the value falls, as seems likely, I’m going to end up in negative equity and be stuck ... but if I pull out and wait is it going to get harder for me to get a mortgage?”
David Nesbit of Nesbits estate agency in Portsmouth said he knew of one sale locally, not through his agency, that had fallen through immediately after the exit result became apparent. “It was someone who was connected with the stockmarket and because of the drop in the market decided not to go ahead.”
He said that while there might be some short-term consolidation in prices – with ambitious sellers not obtaining prices they may have been expecting – a shortage of properties in the area would help stabilise the market.
Other agents warn that Brexit may leave the property market moribund for months. Ian Denton, director of the Jackson-Stops agency in Woburn, Bedfordshire, said: “The usual summer lull may continue through to October while we wait to appoint a new prime minister. The appetite to buy may be less, with people sitting on the fence.”

However, some agents reported a pick-up in interest from buyers, saying the removal of uncertainty and the falling pound were both driving demand for property.

Bidwells in Cambridge, a city which has seen some of the biggest UK prices hikes of recent years, said it had sold a large house on the edge of the city for £2.25m. The vendor had invited sealed bids, to delivered on the day the result was announced, and the winning bidder had offered more than the asking price.
In Midhurst, West Sussex, agent Nick Ferrier of Jackson-Stops said it agreed a sale on a home valued at £5m on Friday morning immediately after the result became apparent. Viewing requests for other properties were still “very strong”, he added.

In London’s ultra-prime market, some agents were almost jubilant, saying that the pound’s steep fall against the dollar would bring international buyers to London.

Robin Paterson of Sotheby’s International Realty, which has a £22m Belgravia 7-bed home among the properties it is currently marketing, said: “The UK’s decision to leave the EU is an historic event and we should embrace this whole heartedly. This opens new opportunities for investment, we may have fewer European investors in the coming months but we believe there will be significant inward investment from Asia, as well as from the US. Buyers from these regions will undoubtedly be looking to snap up bricks and mortar in the UK with the predicted fall in sterling.”

In Chelsea, upmarket agency Hamptons said it had received a new bid on a property from a French buyer who was offering more because the exchange rate had moved in his favour.

One market likely to see a boost is Scotland, with English buyers fleeing to a country aiming to remain in the EU. Rightmove, the property website, said that between 7am and 1pm on Friday, searches for Edinburgh homes were 250% up on the previous day.
However, both Rightmove and Zoopla said it was too early to identify price movements in either the letting or purchase markets as a result of Brexit.