PM says government ‘will not tolerate intolerance’ after reported spike in hate crimes and abuse after EU referendum
David Cameron has condemned “despicable” xenophobic abuse after the EU referendum as figures suggested a 57% increase in reported incidents.
The country would not stand for hate crime, the prime minister told MPs.
“In the past few days we have seen despicable graffiti daubed on a Polish community centre, we’ve seen verbal abuse hurled against individuals because they are members of ethnic minorities,” Cameron said.
“Let’s remember these people have come here and made a wonderful contribution to our country. We will not stand for hate crime or these kinds of attacks, they must be stamped out.”
Police believe there has been an increase in hate crimes and community tensions since last week’s referendum. Initial figures show an increase of 57% in reported incidents between Thursday and Sunday compared with the same days four weeks earlier, the National Police Chiefs’ Council said – 85 incidents were reported compared with 54 during the earlier period.
“It’s no coincidence this has come off the back of the EU vote,” said a police source.
Senior police chiefs have discussed how to respond amid concerns the continuing heated debate may contribute to heightened tensions.
Cameron’s condemnation came amid a growing chorus of concern over intolerance and hostility. The mayor of London and the UK’s biggest Muslim organisation spoke out against a spike in racist abuse in the aftermath of the referendum.
The Polish embassy in the UK said it was shocked at incidents of xenophobic abuse directed at members of its community in the past few days, and the Board of Deputies of British Jews said it was alarmed by reports of harassment and abuse.
Sadiq Khan, who was elected mayor of London last month, said he had put the capital’s police on alert for racially motivated incidents. “It’s really important we stand guard against any rise in hate crimes or abuse by those who might use last week’s referendum as cover to seek to divide us,” he said.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Sadiq Khan attends the Pride in London parade on Saturday. Photograph: Brett Cove/Barcroft Images
“I’ve asked our police to be extra vigilant for any rise in cases of hate crime, and I’m calling on all Londoners to pull together and rally behind this great city.”
The Metropolitan police promised to investigate any reports of hate crime and abuse.
The Muslim Council of Britain urged political and civic leaders to heal divisions exposed by last week’s vote.
Shuja Shafi, the MCB’s secretary general, said: “As the results of the referendum became known, I called for our politicians to come together and heal the divisions that have emerged as a result of the campaign. Now we are witnessing the shocking extent of this with reports around the country of hate speech and minorities being targeted.
“We need leadership now more than ever before. Our country is experiencing a political crisis which, I fear, threatens the social peace.”
The umbrella organisation has compiled a dossier of reported racist and Islamophobic incidents since the result of the referendum was announced on Friday morning.
Racist incidents feared to be linked to Brexit result Read more
It said it had logged many reports of Muslims and others being taunted with “go back home” and similar sentiments.
Thomas Johnstone, 30, of Luton, was charged with two racially aggravated public order offences after the far-right English Defence League protested outside a mosque in Birmingham at the weekend.
After a spate of alleged xenophobic incidents over the weekend, the Polish embassy issued a statement expressing its shock and deep concern.
Reported incidents included graffiti being sprayed on to the walls of a Polish community centre in west London, and cards reading “no more Polish vermin” posted through letterboxes.
The embassy said: “We are shocked and deeply concerned by the recent incidents of xenophobic abuse directed at the Polish community and other UK residents of migrant heritage. The Polish embassy is in contact with relevant institutions, and local police are investigating the two most widely reported cases, in Hammersmith, London, and Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire.
“At the same time we would like to [say thank you] for all the messages of support and solidarity for the Polish community expressed by the British public.”
Racist graffiti was found scrawled across the doors of the Polish Social and Cultural Centre (POSK) in Hammersmith, west London, on Sunday.
By Monday afternoon, the reception desk had been inundated with flowers and cards from locals expressing solidarity and good wishes.
One of the cards read: “Dear Poles, I am so sorry to hear about what happened yesterday. We, the Brits are grateful to you for fighting alongside us in the war and now for the enormous contribution you make to our society. We love you.”
Another started: “Dear Polish friends, we wanted to let you know how very sorry we are to hear about the abusive messages graffitied on to your building. It’s depressing enough that the UK (or part of it) will be leaving the EU. That the result of the referendum seems to have been interpreted by some as a licence to express their racism and xenophobia is truly horrifying.”
Joanna Ciechanowska, the director of POSK’s gallery, who has lived in the UK for 35 years, said she had never encountered racism before.
“All of a sudden a small group of extremists feel empowered. The margins of society feel that they can do it because they think they have the support of half of the nation. It’s sad because living here for so many years and being married to an Englishman I have never actually encountered any racism in this country, and this is the first time it happened straight in my face.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest A floral tribute sent to the Polish arts centre in Hammersmith. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian
“It’s out of character for this area because I frequently engage with Hammersmith council, our recent exhibition of Polish and Russian art was embraced by them, we attend various things they organise. Whoever did this was an ugly person who saw a window of opportunity.”
Elzbieta Pagór, the centre’s librarian, said: “This centre has been here since the 60s, so why now? The referendum made people just explode.
“Me and my family came here in 1983. My eldest son was born in Poland and my younger one was born here and is married to English girl. He says he knew something like this would happen if we voted to leave the EU. That the reaction would be toxic.”
Sipping a coffee at a nearby cafe, the actor Michael Gambon said: “I just heard about it. It’s horrific and shocking. Totally terrible.”
Police said examination of CCTV had shown a suspect arriving at the centre on a bicycle at 5.22am, before spraying yellow graffiti on the doors. The Met said it was being treated as a hate crime.
'The vote made people just explode': Polish centre reeling after graffiti attack Read more
In Wales, the first minister, Carwyn Jones, said the effects of an “ugly atmosphere” created by the leave campaign were being felt on the streets.
“Members cited examples of hateful incidents directed against non-British people in their constituencies over the weekend, and equally distressingly, against people from ethnic minorities born here in Wales,” he said.
“It is incumbent on all of us, no matter how we voted last week, to stand up to anybody who thinks they now have licence to abuse people of different races or nationalities. They have no such licence and should anyone suffer from this sort of abuse, they should report it to the police immediately.”
Speaking for the Board of Deputies, Gillian Merron said: “It is important during these times of political uncertainty in our country to ensure that nobody feels vulnerable and threatened. Everyone, including European Union citizens and other minorities resident in the UK, has the right to security and protection from hate speech.
“The Jewish community knows all too well these feelings of vulnerability and will not remain silent in the face of a reported rise in racially motivated harassment.”
Boris Johnson, who spearheaded the leave campaign and is the frontrunner to succeed Cameron, sought on Monday to reassure Europeans living in Britain.

“I’ve seen a lot of confusion over the weekend about the status of people living in this country. It’s absolutely clear that people from other European Union countries who are living here have their rights protected. All that people want to see is a system that’s fair, impartial and humane to all people coming from around the world,” he said.

“And also, obviously people from the UK living abroad, living in the rest of the EU, will also have their rights completely protected. I just worry there’s been a certain amount of confusion in the media over the last 24 hours.”

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, the Metropolitan police commissioner, said: “London is a diverse, global city where people from many different backgrounds live and work side by side in safety. That hasn’t changed in the past few days, but if people do have any concerns they should let the police know. We will investigate vigorously any reports of crime motivated by hatred.”The UK has been stripped of its last AAA rating as credit agency Standard & Poor’s warned of the economic, fiscal and constitutional risks the country now faces as a result of the EU referendum result.
The two-notch downgrade came with a warning that S&P could slash its rating again. It described the result of the vote as “a seminal event” that would “lead to a less predictable stable and effective policy framework in the UK”.
The agency added that the vote to remain in Scotland and Northern Ireland “creates wider constitutional issues for the country as a whole”.
That downgrade was swiftly followed by a cut to the UK’s credit score from rival agency Fitch.
Intensifying the pressure on the UK’s standing on international markets, Fitch cut the UK’s rating to ‘AA’ from ‘AA+’. The UK had already lost its top rating with Fitch back in 2013. The agency had warned more recently that Brexit could prompt another cut and that it also risked sparking disharmony across the EU.
S&P was the last of the big three ratings agencies to have a blue-chip rating on the UK’s credit-worthiness. Moody’s, which stripped the UK of its top notch rating amid the austerity cuts of 2013, said last week it might further cut its view of the UK.
Rating agency moves have the potential to make it more expensive for the government to borrow.
The moves form S&P and Fitch came after another torrid day on the financial markets. The pound hit fresh 31-year lows and £40bn was wiped off the value of the UK’s biggest companies on Monday, despite efforts by George Osborne to quell investors’ concerns about the economic and political ramifications of the Brexit vote.
After three days of silence, the chancellor made a statement on Monday morning to try to calm the markets. However, sterling remained under sustained pressure on the foreign exchange markets as economists slashed their forecasts for UK economic growth. Wall Street was also weaker while continental bourses sold off sharply after Friday’s record $2tn of losses on global stock markets.
Expectations are mounting that the Bank of England will cut interest rates – possibly to zero from their historic low 0.5% – to stimulate the economy, and yields on government bonds fell below 1% for the first time, which could spell cheaper mortgage rates.
In a live broadcast just after 7am, as dealers in London braced for another day of turmoil, Osborne insisted: “Our economy is about as strong as it could be to confront the challenge our country now faces.”
But moderate losses on the FTSE 100quickly deepened and at one point sterling was down 3.5% against the dollar, at $1.3122, its lowest level since 1985. Against the euro, the pound was down 2.4% at €1.19.
Speaking at the World Economic Forum in China, Nouriel Roubini, economist at New York University, described Brexit as “a major significant financial shock” that would create “a whole bunch of economic, financial, political and also geopolitical uncertainties”.
By the end of trading, the FTSE 100 index was down 2.6%, or 156.5 points, and below 6,000. The FTSE 250, the next tier of companies and more closely tied to the UK economy, was down 7%, coming on top of a 7% fall on Friday.
“It’s been another dramatic day of trading on the UK stock market,” said Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at the financial firm Hargreaves Lansdown.
Companies likely to be impacted by a Brexit-induced recession were hit hard. In two days, about £40bn has been wiped off the value of banking stocks and £8bn off housebuilders. At one point, shares in the bailed-out Royal Bank of Scotland plunged 25%, while housebuilders such as Persimmon and Taylor Wimpey have lost more than 40% in just two trading days.
Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets, said while Osborne’s statement had been measured his comments “were unable to prevent the feeling that UK politics remains in a state of paralysis, with no clear contingencies in place to deal with the fallout of a leave vote”.
The biggest faller in the FTSE 100 was short-haul airline easyjet, which plunged by 22% after warning that wary consumers would now rethink their travel plans. Exchange rate movements, the carrier added, would add £25m to costs.
Another profit warning came from the London-focused estate agent Foxtons. Its shares dived 25% after it said Brexit would hit sales for the rest of the year. Shares in so-called challenger banks such as Virgin Money were also pummelled.
Osborne spoke after it emerged that the Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, had cancelled a trip to Portugal to remain in the UK to oversee any response from Threadneedle Street.
The Bank’s financial policy committee, set in the aftermath of the financial crisis to look for threats to stability, will meet on Tuesday, when the Bank of England will again offer emergency loans to banks as part of its Brexit planning.
The fallout from the vote is being felt around the world. Italy’s main index fell 4%, extending Friday’s record losses of 12.5%. In Germany and France there were losses of 3%. At the time of the London close, on Wall Street the main share indices were all down more than 1%.
The chancellor may have taken some comfort from the fall in yields on 10-year government bonds. Yields on these gilts, which move inversely to prices, fell below 1% for the first time. This fall in gilt yields will keep government borrowing costs down and lead to lower mortgage rates. However, they also mean pension companies have started cutting the amount paid to the newly retired.
Osborne refused to repeat his pre-vote warning of a Brexit recession, saying only that the economy would face “adjustments”. But analysts started to cut their forecasts for UK growth. Goldman Sachs, forecasts just 0.2% growth in 2017, down from 2% predicted previously.
The consultancy Oxford Economics said interest rates could be slashed to 0% within weeks. Morgan Stanley analysts said European and UK stocks would fall up to 10% over the coming months and sterling would fall to between $1.25 and $1.30.
Much of the market’s focus has been on the pound, particularly after the speculator George Soros, who made $1bn when sterling fell out of the exchange rate mechanism in 1992, had warned of a “black Friday” in the event of Brexit. His spokesman stressed that he had not bet against the pound last week.

“George Soros did not speculate against sterling while he was arguing for Britain to remain in the European Union,” the spokesman told Reuters. “However, because of his generally bearish outlook on world markets, Mr Soros did profit from other investments.”HBO’s host of Last Week Tonight, who has previously made his views on the EU referendum clear, says the United Kingdom’s very name now ‘sounds sarcastic’
John Oliver, already known as a vocal opponent of Brexit, has delivered a furious monologue attacking the British prime minister and key figures in the campaign for the UK to leave the EU.
“The United Kingdom,” the British host of Last Week Tonight said at the start of his show on Sunday. “A place whose very name, after this week’s events, is beginning to sound a bit sarcastic.”
First on his list of targets was David Cameron, who announced his resignation as a result of the Brexit vote. The news of his departure, Oliver admitted, should have made the host happy – but didn’t.
John Oliver on Brexit: 'Britain would be absolutely crazy to leave' the EU Read more
“It’s like catching an ice cream cone out of the air because a child was hit by a car,” the host said. “I mean, I’ll eat it. I’ll eat it, but it’s tainted somehow.”
Next up were leave leaders Nigel Farage, leader of the UK Independence Party, whom Oliver called a “three-time cover model for punchable face magazine”, and Boris Johnson, former mayor of London, “a shaved orangutan with Owen Wilson’s hair”.
Farage and Johnson had both referred to Britain leaving the EU as an Independence Day for the UK.
“Britain was already independent,” the exasperated Oliver said. “In fact, it’s what many other countries celebrate their independence from.”
Oliver said he had no sympathy for those voters who are feeling remorseful about their decision to leave.
“It wasn’t a practice round,” he yelled, arms waving. “That was it!”
After playing a clip of an interview with a Portuguese woman living in the UK whose children had asked her what would happen to them next, Oliver said: “Perhaps I can help you with that, because it’s easy. Just tell them they might be screwed because a pig-fucker called for a vote, a bus had some bullshit written on it, and then two idiots named Nigel and Boris quoted President Bill Pullman.”
Turning to Republican nominee Donald Trump, who happened to be in Scotland when the result was announced, Oliver said: “You might think, ‘Well, that is not going to happen to us in America. We’re not going to listen to some ridiculously haired buffoon peddling lies and nativism in the hopes of riding a protest vote into power.’
“Well, let Britain tell you: it can happen. And when it does, there are no fucking do-overs.”