Anheuser-Busch InBev said on Tuesday that it would now pay 45 pounds, or $59, a share in cash for SABMiller, an increase of £1 from its prior offer. That would value SABMiller, which is based in London, at £79 billion.
Investors would have an option to accept a cash-and-share alternative that would pay £4.6588 in cash and 0.483969 in restricted shares for each share of SABMiller. The share alternative would be available for up to 41 percent of SABMiller’s shares.
Shares of SABMiller closed at £44.40 in London on Monday.
In a news release, Anheuser-Busch InBev said that the offer was “final and that it will not further increase the cash consideration or the cash element or the exchange ratio of the partial share alternative.”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Anheuser-Busch InBev initially made the offer of a partial share alternative to win the support of SABMiller’s two largest shareholders — the American tobacco giant Altria and the Santo Domingo family of Colombia. The share alternative was intended to allow them to avoid a huge tax bill from the sale of their holdings.
But some investors raised concerns in recent weeks about an increase in the value of the share alternative as the pound has fallen sharply since the June vote.
The revised share alternative was worth £51.14 a share as of Monday’s close, but that did not account for “any discount for the unlisted nature of the restricted shares and the restrictions on transfer that will apply to them,” Anheuser-Busch InBev said. Those shares would be subject to a lockup period of five years.
In a separate statement, SABMiller said it was considering the revised offer and confirmed that its chairman had a discussion with Anheuser-Busch InBev’s chairman last week about the offer in light of “recent exchange rate volatility and market movements.” SABMiller also said that its board had hired Centerview Partners to provide additional financial advice alongside that of its existing advisers.
Aberdeen Asset Management, an SABMiller shareholder, said in a statement on Tuesday, however, that the revised deal “remains unacceptable” because it undervalues the company and favors SABMiller’s two largest shareholders.
“We have engaged with SABMiller’s board on the differential treatment of shareholders since the deal was first constructed,” Aberdeen said. “The way that the value of the partial share offer has diverged from the cash offer has compounded our discomfort.”
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Anheuser-Busch has received regulatory approval in the European Union, South Africa and the United States for the transaction and is awaiting approval in China. It also has entered into a number of agreements to sell assets from the combined company in order to placate regulators about the deal.