Barcelona (CNN) Barcelona's revered football club played a tense match behind closed doors on Sunday as Catalonia's disputed independence referendum descended into violence.
Its famous slogan, "Mes que un club" -- more than a club -- was spelled out across the seats of the empty Camp Nou stadium as scenes of unrest unfolded across the region.
After an emergency board meeting, the club said it had taken the decision to ban fans from the match against fellow Spanish La Liga club Las Palmas after the national league refused to postpone it.
Las Palmas indicated that it opposed the breakup of Spain, sending its players onto the pitch with small Spanish flags sewn onto their jerseys.
Barcelona's players took to the field wearing red and yellow shirts, the colors of Catalonia, before reverting to its normal strip for the match.
The club said that the extraordinary events in Catalonia warranted a postponement, and having failed to secure one, the it decided to play in an empty stadium.
"FC Barcelona condemns the events which have taken place in many parts of Catalonia today in order to prevent its citizens exercising their democratic right to free expression," the club said in a statement.
"Given the exceptional nature of events, the Board of Directors have decided that the FC Barcelona first team game against Las Palmas will be played behind closed doors following the Professional Football League's refusal to postpone the game."
Spectators queued to access the Camp Nou stadium ahead of the match, which was ultimately played with empty stands after violence erupted at polling stations.
More than a club
FC Barcelona's history is knitted in to the fabric of the region, its motto underlining the club's significance as a Catalan institution.
It was a touchstone of Catalan resistance to Franco's fascist regime, which ruled Spain from 1939 to 1975, and has long been a strong supporter of Catalans' right to self-determination, if not specifically this unsanctioned vote.
"Throughout the most difficult of times, Barça was the standard that represented Catalonia and the Catalan people's desire for freedom, a symbolism that has continued to be closely linked to the idiosyncrasy of the club and its members to this day," the club says on its website.
FC Barcelona pose for a team photo wearing shirts in the colors of the Catalan flag prior to kickoff. The team played the match in its traditional home jersey.
Throughout Sunday's game, the scoreboard of the Camp Nou read "democracia" -- democracy. The fixture ended in a 3-0 victory for Barça, with star player Lionel Messi scoring twice.
The scoreboard today at Camp Nou #BarçaLasPalmas pic.twitter.com/F76xwyU3AK — FC Barcelona (@FCBarcelona) October 1, 2017
Ahead of Sunday's vote, the Spanish league had suggested that Barcelona, along with the region's other top-flight clubs Girona and Espanyol, could be expelled from the league's top division La Liga competition if Catalonia seceded, according to Marca , a Spanish sports newspaper.
Catalan fans said that they were hopeful that the club would support the referendum.
"Barça and Catalonia have been linked historically and the club should be 100% committed to the people of Catalonia," Carles Ordiales, president of supporters group Seguiment, told Marca.
"I believe the club should have an even stronger position in favor of the right to decide."
Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Protesters march through Barcelona during a demonstration to support the unity of Spain on October 8. A bitterly contested independence referendum on October 1 has stoked fierce divisions in the northeastern region of Catalonia and across Spain. Hide Caption 1 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Thousands of people gather in Barcelona to rally for unity in Spain on October 8. Hide Caption 2 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Protesters hold Spanish flags during a demonstration against independence for Catalonia on October 8. Hide Caption 3 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Demonstrators urge a peaceful dialogue to resolve the crisis over Catalan independence on Saturday, October 7, in Madrid, Spain. Hide Caption 4 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Crowds raise their hands during a demonstration October 7 in Barcelona encouraging talks to ease tensions over independence. Catalan nationalists argue the region is a separate nation with its own history, culture and language. But many Catalans also oppose separatism from Spain. Hide Caption 5 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis People show their hands painted in white during a demonstration urging dialogue on October 7 in Madrid. Neither the Catalan regional government nor the national government in Madrid has been willing to give ground since the referendum. Hide Caption 6 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis A woman wears a sticker with the Spanish word for "peace" at a demonstration in Madrid on October 7. Hide Caption 7 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Protesters with Spanish flags gather to demonstrate against independence for Catalonia in Madrid on October 7. Hide Caption 8 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis People attend a protest in Barcelona on Monday, October 2, a day after hundreds were injured in a police crackdown during the banned referendum. The Catalan government claimed victory after pushing forward with the vote despite Spain's Constitutional Court declaring it illegal. Hide Caption 9 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Catalan President Carles Puigdemont greets regional government workers before a meeting at the Palace of the Generalitat in Barcelona on October 2. Hide Caption 10 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Independence supporters gather in Barcelona after Catalonia's separatist government held a referendum to decide if the region should split from Spain on Sunday, October 1. Hide Caption 11 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis A member of the Catalan National Assembly cries at the end of the voting day on October 1. Hide Caption 12 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Spanish riot police remove fences thrown at them as they try to prevent people from voting in Barcelona, Spain, on Sunday, October 1. Hide Caption 13 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Pro-referendum supporters clash with members of the Spanish National Police after police tried to enter a polling station to retrieve ballot boxes. Hide Caption 14 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Pro-referendum supporters lock a gate to a polling station as members of the Spanish National Police arrive to control the area during voting at the Escola Industrial of Barcelona. Hide Caption 15 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Spanish National Police clash with pro-referendum supporters in Barcelona. Hide Caption 16 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Pro-independence supporters cover a mock ballot box with Estelada Catalan flags in Pamplona, northern Spain. Hide Caption 17 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Spanish National Police clash with pro-referendum supporters in Barcelona. Hide Caption 18 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis People play games in a square where a giant pro-independence Estelada Catalan flag is displayed. Hide Caption 19 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis A woman celebrates after voting at a polling station in Barcelona on October 1. Hide Caption 20 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis People help a man injured by a rubber bullet fired by Spanish police officers outside the Ramon Llull polling station in Barcelona. Hide Caption 21 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Pro-referendum supporters embrace as Spanish National Police try to remove them from the Ramon Llull school in Barcelona. Hide Caption 22 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis People queue to vote at a school in Barcelona. Hide Caption 23 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis A woman casts her vote at a polling station in Barcelona. Hide Caption 24 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Spanish riot police shoot rubber bullets at people trying to reach a voting site designated by the Catalan government in Barcelona. The deputy mayor of Barcelona said police fired rubber bullets at people as they attempted to vote in the referendum, which Spain's top court has declared illegal. There were reports that police in Girona, Spain, used batons. Hide Caption 25 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis A protestor shouts as he holds a Catalan flag during a demonstration called by far-right groups in Barcelona. Hide Caption 26 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Catalan President Carles Puigdemont, center, arrives to inspect a sports hall as police interve in Girona, Spain. Puigdemont condemned "indiscriminate aggression" against peaceful voters. Hide Caption 27 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis A Spanish riot police officer swings a club against would-be voters near a school assigned to be a polling station by the Catalan government in Barcelona. Hide Caption 28 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Riot police drag a member of the public away from a school being used as a polling station. Regional authorities said 337 people were injured after Madrid deployed the national police force to close down polling stations. Catalan emergency services confirmed the number to CNN. Hide Caption 29 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis People clash with Spanish National Police outside the Ramon Llull school, designated as a polling station by the Catalan government in Barcelona, Spain, early Sunday, October 1. Catalan pro-referendum supporters vowed to ignore a police ultimatum to leave the schools they are occupying to use in a vote seeking independence from Spain. Hide Caption 30 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis People try to offer flowers to a civil guard at the entrance of a sports center, assigned to be a referendum polling station by the Catalan government in Sant Julia de Ramis, near Girona, Spain, October 1. Hide Caption 31 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis People attend a demonstration against a referendum on independence for Catalonia on October 1 in Madrid, Spain. Hide Caption 32 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis A woman casts her vote in a ballot at a polling station in Barcelona, on October 01 during a referendum on independence for Catalonia. Hide Caption 33 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Members of Spain's national police force clear people from a polling station where Catalan President Carles Puigdemont had been expected to vote, in Sant Julia de Ramis, near Girona, Spain on October 1. Catalan pro-referendum supporters said they would not comply with a police order to leave the schools they are occupying to use in a vote seeking independence from Spain. Hide Caption 34 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis A woman celebrates outside a polling station after casting her vote in Barcelona, on October 01 in a referendum on independence for Catalonia. Hide Caption 35 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis Family members comfort each other after they were unable to vote in the referendum after Spanish police closed their polling station October 1 in Sant Julia de Ramis, Spain. Hide Caption 36 of 37 Photos: Divisions in Spain over Catalonia crisis People wait at the doors of the Moises Broggi school to start voting during the Catalan independence referendum in Barcelona, Spain on October 1. Hide Caption 37 of 37
Clubs on opposite sides
Before the fixture, it was clear that each club would be on opposing sides politically as well as on the field.
Las Palmas, from the Spanish island of Gran Canaria, said its decision to sew the Spanish flag into its players' jerseys was a "moderate" gesture.
"Regardless of how far away the Gran Canaria Stadium is, we have never felt the least temptation to be part of a country other than this," the team said in a statement.
Barcelona players have been vocal in their support of the referendum.
Star player Gerard Piqué tweeted a photo of himself voting, and said: "I have voted. Together we are unstoppable defending democracy."
Ja he votat. Junts som imparables defensant la democràcia. pic.twitter.com/mGXf7Qj1TM — Gerard Piqué (@3gerardpique) October 1, 2017
Piqué told journalists that he would still make himself available for the Spanish national team as it prepared for next year's World Cup in Russia.
However, he added that "if the (coach), or any other person of the Federation, believes that I am a problem, or a bother, I'll have no problem in stepping aside, and leave the (team) before 2018."
The club's legendary former player, Xavi, who retired in 2014, condemned the Spanish crackdown on the vote. "What is happening in Barcelona is a disgrace," he said.
"It's inadmissible that in a democratic country the people are not allowed to vote. I give my full support to the people who are peacefully trying to exert their right to vote."