"These visits will be an opportunity to forge a strong working relationship that we can build upon and which I hope to develop with more leaders across the European Union in the weeks and months ahead," May said in a statement Wednesday.
"If it's a sustained and large increase in price, which it isn't at this point, then Ukraine could have an impact but bear in mind that prices are still lower than at the end of 2012," Watts said.Lenovo, the world’s biggest maker of personal computers, has said it is considering price increases in reaction to sterling’s fall.
The US computer maker said it had held off on price increases for UK business customers before the referendum but that they were now on the way, although consumer products would not be affected immediately.
“The recent strengthening of the US dollar versus sterling and other currencies … following the UK’s decision to leave the European Union, will have a direct impact on the price we sell to our UK [business] customers and partners.
Smartphone maker OnePlus said it would raise the price of its OnePlus 3 model from £309 to £329 from 11 July, also attributing the hike to the post-Brexit vote fall in the pound.
Even so, City analysts said the Bank was still likely to announce fresh stimulus measures for the economy next month in anticipation that the better-than-expected economic news since the referendum would not last.
Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said: “While there may be some relief that the economy may have dodged an immediate sharp slowdown from the Brexit vote, the danger is still very much there given the major uncertainty that is apparent – and there seems a compelling case for the Bank of England to deliver a substantial package of measures at its August meeting to try and bolster business and consumer confidence”
The Bank of England said its agents had stepped up their investigations in the wake of the Brexit vote to find out how businesses were reacting.
The ONS said the unemployment rate had edged down from 5% to 4.9% and was last lower in the July to September period of 2005.London (CNN) Theresa May is meeting with German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin Wednesday on her first international trip as Britain's Prime Minister, for talks that she hopes will help smooth Brexit negotiations.
She said the business of negotiating Britain's exit from the bloc would take time and "require serious and detailed work."