Crimea, which Russia transferred to Ukraine in 1954, is still almost entirely Russian-speaking and home to the headquarters of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet.
Russia now has 15,000 troops in Ukraine's Crimea region, Yegor Pyvovarov, the spokesman for the Ukraine mission at the United Nations, told CNN ahead of Saturday's session of the Security Council.
British Prime Minister David Cameron and U.S. President Barack Obama are of like mind about Russia's military exercises in relation to Ukraine: "There must be significant costs to Russia if it does not change course on Ukraine," Hague said.
The Crimean peninsula itself had been ruled by Russia for centuries until Nikita Khrushchev gave it away to Ukraine in 1954, a move that was deeply unpopular in Russia – some say Khrushchev was drunk at the time –and most ordinary Russians – as well, it seems, as a majority of Crimeans themselves – would like to see it returned to Russia.
Putin says Russia's actions fall within the scope of the 1997 Friendship Treaty between Ukraine and the Russian Federation.
Preliminary results in Sunday's referendum on whether Ukraine's Crimea region should join Russia or become an independent state show overwhelming support for Russia.
In the words of Vladimir Putin, "In people's hearts and minds, Crimea has always been an inseparable part of Russia." Indeed Russia said that in Sunday's referendum 97% of its participants, mostly ethnic Russians, insisted that to belong to the Great Russia versus Small Russia (Malorossiya, another name for Ukraine) had been their dream for 60 years since the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, my great-grandfather, transferred the peninsula's jurisdiction to Kiev.
But they will not enter the contested region of Crimea, a statement from the Russian Foreign Ministry said, because this "became part of Russia."
But they will not enter the contested region of Crimea, a statement from the Russian Foreign Ministry said, because this "became part of Russia."
Amid fears of further Russian military moves in Ukraine, G7 meets in The Hague without Russia for the first time since 1998
News of the proposed changes came during Obama's trip to Europe, where he's mobilizing support for isolating Russia over its military occupation and annexation of Crimea from Ukraine.
Russia annexed Crimea last week after a controversial referendum that Ukraine and the West say was illegal.
Ukraine's new leaders -- who took office after months of protests forced President Viktor Yanukovych, a Russian ally, from office -- as well as the United States and other Western powers say Crimea is still a part of Ukraine.
Crimea had belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine.
As of March 18, Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said that Ukraine would not be seeking NATO membership, a move designed to placate Russia as well as Ukraine's large Russian-speaking population.