Japan's Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga said Friday, "it is extremely important to keep pressuring North Korea in coordination with US, South Korea and other countries."
The report comes the same month the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed a new round of sanctions on North Korea in response to the testing of two ballistic missiles in July that experts say may be able to reach the United States.
"The United Nations Security Council just voted 15-0 to sanction North Korea.
MUST WATCH What Trump has said about North Korea 02:05
Though China voted in favor of the UN sanctions, the country has long said it's opposed to unilateral measures to punish North Korea like the Japanese announced Friday.
North Korea has long said unless the United States abandons its "hostile policy" toward Pyongyang, it will continue ahead with its nuclear program.
Park said that the two countries would "spare no efforts" to deter North Korea.
He said the United States would bring “fire and fury” to the North if it was threatened, and Sunday’s nuclear test, claimed by the North to be a hydrogen bomb, was accompanied by North Korea’s announcement that the weapon could be fitted on a missile that could reach the United States.
(About 67 percent of South Koreans polled said that South Korea should get such weapons.) The nuclearization of Japan — or South Korea — would undermine nonproliferation efforts, as well as validate North Korea’s nuclear brinkmanship to date.
In retaliation against the nuclear test, the United Nations Security Council adopted the new sanctions resolution against North Korea on Tuesday, its ninth since the country’s first nuclear test in 2006.
Zhao said, in an effort to deter North Korea, Japan could provoke an arms race in East Asia with South Korea, China and even Russia.
In response, Japan, the United States and South Korea engaged in dialogue with North Korea and agreed to construct two light-water reactors and to provide heavy fuel oil in exchange for freezing and ultimately dismantling its nuclear program.
China and Russia then joined Japan, the United States and South Korea to create the six-party talks with the North.
According to the United Nations, foreign-made parts have been used in North Korea’s ballistic missiles.