Facebook Twitter Pinterest Rescue workers scaled the side of the ferry to reach trapped passengers.
The captain was one of at least 174 people rescued soon after the Sewol began to sink, violating an "age-old rule and internationally recognized rule that a captain must stay on the vessel," maritime law attorney Jack Hickey said. 
More than 270 people are still unaccounted for as efforts continue to rescue passengers aboard a South Korean ferry that sank off the country’s south-west coast on Wednesday morning.
Officials said six of the ship’s 462 passengers had died, at least 55 are injured and 179 have been rescued. Many passengers - of which 300 are children - may have been trapped inside the vessel as it listed and sank.
A total of 277 people remained missing.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Rescue workers retrieve survivors.
Dozens of coastguard and navy vessels were battling to rescue passengers, including 325 high school pupils and their teachers. A major rescue operation is now underway involving more than 30 coastguard and military ships, as well as about a dozen helicopters.
Authorities said the dead included a female crew member in her early 20 and two male high school students. A coast guard officer confirmed a fourth fatality but had no immediate details about it.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest South Korean coastguards on the rescue operation around the stricken passenger ferry Sewol on Wednesday. Photograph: Yonhap/EPA
There were conflicting reports throughout the morning of the number of people who had been rescued. Four hours after the accident, Yonhap said 368 people had been confirmed as safe, including 13 injured, with a further 107 unaccounted for.
The Sewol, a car and passenger ferry, sent out a distress signal shortly before 9am local time. The 6,852-tonne vessel had been en route from the western port of Incheon to the southern resort island of Jeju, located about 100 kilometres (60 miles) off the mainland, when it reportedly hit rocks and began listing severely.
Early reports by some South Korean media indicated that all 338 high school pupils and their teachers were safe following a huge rescue operation involving civilian and military vessels, and helicopters.
But as reports emerged that two people were dead, YTN, a major TV network, withdrew the report and said it had yet to confirm the safety of all of the members of the school party.
The area had been shrouded in fog overnight, leading to the cancellation of many ferry services to islands. But news reports said visibility in the area was fair on Wednesday morning.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Coastguards rescuing passengers and crew aboard the South Korean ferry Sewol which sank on Wednesday on its way to Jeju island from Incheon. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images
"We heard a big thumping sound and the boat stopped," one passenger told the YTN by telephone. "The boat is tilting and we have to hold on to something to stay seated."
Another told the network that at least one helicopter had reached the vessel, adding that other passengers had remained in their cabins soon after the accident but were having trouble keeping their balance.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest An injured passenger is stretchered by rescue personnel after ferry Sewol sank in waters off South Korea on Wednesday. Photograph: Yonhap/EPA
Other reports said passengers had been told to put on lifejackets and jump into the sea amid fears that the vessel was on the verge of sinking. News footage showed that at least one lifeboat aboard the ferry had been deployed.
"The ship is taking in water and sinking," a coastguard spokesman told AFP by phone as the rescue operation got under way. "There are around 450 people on board and we have coastguard vessels, commercial ships in the area, as well as helicopters all engaged in the rescue operation," the spokesman added.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Rescued passengers, wrapped in blankets, being brought onto land in Jindo after the ferry disaster. Photograph: Yonhap/AFP/Getty Images
A total of 18 helicopters and 34 rescue boats have been sent to the area, Lee Gyeong-og, a government vice minister, told a televised news conference. He added that the South Korean president, Park Geun-hye had urged rescue teams to do their utmost to save everyone on board.
local maritime officials, and was due to arrive at Jeju later on Wednesday.
Dramatic images on South Korean TV showed the capsized ship tilted 45 degrees on its port side. Later, the vessel appeared to have inverted and was almost completely submerged.Some petrified passengers jumped into sea before Sewol sank but many more were thought to be trapped on board
Survivors of Wednesday's ferry accident off the coast of South Korea have described chaotic scenes after the vessel listed and started to sink, possibly after running aground, forcing petrified passengers to jump into the sea before it disappeared beneath the water.
Lim Hyung-min, one of a group of 325 high school pupils aboard the Sewol, told the told the YTN network that he had put on a life jacket and jumped into the sea with other pupils, before swimming to a nearby rescue boat.
"As the ferry was shaking and tilting, we all tripped and bumped into each another," Lim said from a gymnasium on a nearby island, where he and other survivors were being treated.
Other survivors said they feared the death toll would rise significantly as they believed dozens of people were still trapped inside the ferry after it listed and then sank into the sea about 20km (12 miles) from the coast of Byungpoong island about two hours after issuing a distress signal.
Kim Seong-mok told YTN he was certain people were trapped inside the ship as water levels quickly rose inside. The vessel's severe tilt prevented many from reaching exits from where they might have been able to leap into the sea to be picked up by rescue boats.
Some people yelled at those who couldn't get out, urging them to break windows, said Kim, who had just eaten breakfast when he felt the ferry tilt and then crash into something.
The ferry operator reportedly asked passengers to stay inside their cabins, Kim said, adding that he had not heard an announcement urging people to leave the ship before it sank.
"There was a bang and then the ship suddenly tilted over," Yonhap quoted a 57-year-old survivor as saying. "Downstairs were restaurants, shops and entertainment rooms, and those who were there are feared to have failed to escape."
The chances of surviving for long in the sea were slim. The temperature in the sea separating the South Korean mainland from a string of islands off its south-west coast was about 12C on Wednesday – cold enough to bring on symptoms of hypothermia after 90 minutes to two hours, according to a rescue worker quoted by Associated Press.
Navy divers trying to locate people still trapped inside the ship were frustrated by poor visibility created by mud stirred up from the seabed.
The Sewol sent out a distress signal shortly before 9am local time. The 6,825-ton vessel had been en route from the western port of Incheon to Jeju, located about 100km (60 miles) off the mainland, when it reportedly hit rocks and began listing severely.
Pupils at the school were sent home early as distraught parents arrived seeking information about their children. Others rushed to ports in the country's south-west after receiving calls from their children confirming they were safe. One pupil said she saw several parents in tears as she left the school. Children who had not joined the trip started crying as news of the accident came through on their mobile phones, reports said.Most countries do not explicitly state that a captain must be the last person to leave a distressed ship, experts say, giving captains the leeway to board lifeboats or nearby ships if they can better command an evacuation from there. South Korea’s law, however, appears to be explicit, allowing the authorities to arrest Mr. Lee for abandoning the boat and its passengers in a time of crisis. An international maritime treaty known as the Safety of Life at Sea — first adopted in 1914 after the Titanic disaster — makes a ship’s captain responsible for the safety of his vessel and everyone on board. A later version of the treaty said that passengers should be able to evacuate within 30 minutes of a general alarm.
The actions of the captain and crew of the sunken ferry Sewol "are akin to murder," South Korean President Park Geun-hye said Monday.
The captain, Lee Joon-seok, has defended his decision to tell passengers to stay put as the ferry began sinking, saying he was concerned about the sea's strong currents and cold water as well as the lack of rescue ships.
What they didn't know was the passengers, including the 325 students from Danwon High School on a field trip, had been told by the ferry's crew to stay put. While the ferry continued its inexorable descent into the cold waters of the Yellow Sea, those on board trusted in the orders of their crew.
In videos recovered from the cellphones of passengers aboard the ferry Sewol, a voice can be heard over the ship’s intercom urging students and their teachers to stay put, telling them they are safer where they are. But as the ship continued to tip and the voice over the intercom repeated the same instructions, panic spread. Some passengers apparently sensed the approaching doom, and sent farewells to their families.
The young passengers were among 325 second-year high school students on board the 6,825-ton ferry, which sank on April 16. After Su-hyeon, 17, was found dead, the police returned the boy’s recovered personal items to his family, who discovered the video on his phone. This week, his father, Park Jong-dae, released the video to the local news media, saying that South Koreans must watch it to learn what went wrong.
Among the text messages, photos and video clips that have been produced by passengers of the ill-fated ship, Su-hyeon’s 15-minute footage bears the most dramatic witness to the panic and fear, as well as youthful naïveté and optimism, of the students trapped inside the ship while many of the crew members, including the captain, were among the first to desert their vessel.
“The ship is leaning!” one passenger can be heard saying.
At 8:53, a voice on the intercom again advised the passengers not to move.
“What? Hurry! Save us!” a student shrieked. Another wondered, “Are we going to die?” A minute later, as the ship listed further, some students suggested donning life jackets. An announcement over the intercom again instructed passengers to stay where they were.
Over the intercom, the students were again urged not to move and to hold onto what they could. The ship’s captain and crew members later told reporters and investigators that they had thought it was safer for the passengers to stay in their cabins than to move in a panicked mass, causing the ship to list faster, or for them to jump into cold waters when the rescue ships were still far away.
At 9:03, one student wondered, “What is the captain doing?”
More than 20 minutes later, the first Coast Guard helicopters and ships arrived at the scene. Video from another student’s phone shows female students cheering when they hear helicopters overhead. That four-minute video was taken beginning at 9:37 by Park Ye-seul, who died on the ferry, and was released to JTBC by her father.
One of Ye-seul’s classmates could be heard pleading: “Save us, save us.” But one of the first things the Coast Guard rescuers did was help the ship’s captain, Lee Jun-seok, and other crew members off the sinking ferry.
Mr. Lee, the captain, was in his room and the least experienced of his four mates was in charge of its navigation when the vessel suddenly listed in waters notorious for rapid and unpredictable currents. Mr. Lee and 14 other crew members have been arrested on charges of abandoning their passengers in an emergency.
SEOUL, South Korea — As a ferry carrying 476 people was badly listing off the southwestern coast of South Korea two weeks ago, one of the students on board asked, “Are we becoming a Titanic?”
As students felt the ship shuddering and wondered whether it was sinking, a crew member came onto the intercom, urging students to stay put.
At 8:55, while the ship’s crew sent its first distress signal, one student in the cabin below shouted, “We don’t want to die!”
Three minutes later, students yelled “Silence! Silence!” as the ship’s intercom crackled again, repeating the same message: Stay put and wear life jackets if possible.
“Yes, sir!” a few students responded in a hopeful tone. But another questioned the instruction: “What’s going on? If they are telling us to wear life jackets, doesn’t that mean that the ship is sinking?”
“This is fun!” another shouted, not realizing that the ferry would soon capsize and sink.
Su-hyeon’s video begins at 8:52 a.m. on April 16. That was three minutes before the ferry sent its first distress signal to maritime traffic controllers on shore.
Though the vessel had tilted so much that some students were grabbing the railings on the wall to hang on, the video showed no sign of students trying to escape.
At 8:57, as another announcement from the crew advised “please never move,” one student said: “Should I call Mom? Mom, this looks like the end of me.”
At 9:08, a minute before the video ends, one student was heard saying, “I am scared,” and others wondered whether their teacher was safe.
After a two-and-a-half-minute break, the video resumed at 9:00, when students began passing one another life jackets and one wanted to have a picture taken as a “souvenir.” Some students complained that the zippers of their life jackets did not work and one student gave his life jacket to a classmate who could not find one.
Video footage released by the Coast Guard showed no officers trying to move below deck where the students were trapped. Investigators are reviewing the cellphone videos as part of their investigation.
As of Wednesday, 210 people were confirmed dead, with 92 still missing. Of the dead or missing, 250 were students on a school trip to a resort island.
The video was edited to blur the faces of the students, and the students whose voices were captured were not identified.
“Nonsense,” one student shouted. Another said: “I want to get off. I mean it.”
Some of the male students appeared to hide their growing fear with jokes and uneasy laughs. One student said, “We are going to make news with this.” Another said, “This is going to be a lot of fun if we get it onto our Facebook.”
