JUST WATCHED How much damage can North Korea's weapons do?
JUST WATCHED What Trump has said about North Korea Replay More Videos ...
MUST WATCH What Trump has said about North Korea 02:05
North Korea has long said unless the United States abandons its "hostile policy" toward Pyongyang, it will continue ahead with its nuclear program.
-- Trump took to Twitter after the announcement and said North Korea's "words and actions continue to be very hostile and dangerous to the United States." He added that Pyongyang has become a "great threat and embarrassment to China, which is trying to help but with little success"; warned South Korea their "talk of appeasement with North Korea will not work"; and said Washington is considering "stopping all trade with any country doing business with North Korea."
He said the United States would bring “fire and fury” to the North if it was threatened, and Sunday’s nuclear test, claimed by the North to be a hydrogen bomb, was accompanied by North Korea’s announcement that the weapon could be fitted on a missile that could reach the United States.
“We will respond to the United States’ gangsterlike racket for sanctions and pressure in our own way,” a spokesman for North Korea’s Foreign Ministry told its official Korean Central News Agency on Tuesday.
(About 67 percent of South Koreans polled said that South Korea should get such weapons.) The nuclearization of Japan — or South Korea — would undermine nonproliferation efforts, as well as validate North Korea’s nuclear brinkmanship to date.
but the tense conditions are not just about North Korea but about China and the US as well," he said.How could North Korea relentlessly pursue missile development and nuclear tests over almost half a century?
In response, Japan, the United States and South Korea engaged in dialogue with North Korea and agreed to construct two light-water reactors and to provide heavy fuel oil in exchange for freezing and ultimately dismantling its nuclear program.
Considering this history and its continuing missile launches and nuclear tests, more dialogue with North Korea would be a dead end.
China and Russia then joined Japan, the United States and South Korea to create the six-party talks with the North.