"These visits will be an opportunity to forge a strong working relationship that we can build upon and which I hope to develop with more leaders across the European Union in the weeks and months ahead," May said in a statement Wednesday.
But Jack Watts, an analyst at the Home-Grown Cereals Authority, said rising prices were caused by bad harvests over a prolonged period starting in 2007 and ending in 2012.
"If it's a sustained and large increase in price, which it isn't at this point, then Ukraine could have an impact but bear in mind that prices are still lower than at the end of 2012," Watts said.Lenovo, the world’s biggest maker of personal computers, has said it is considering price increases in reaction to sterling’s fall.
The US computer maker said it had held off on price increases for UK business customers before the referendum but that they were now on the way, although consumer products would not be affected immediately.
Other computer makers are likely to increase UK prices following the pound’s fall to 31-year lows this week – a drop of more than 10% since the referendum.
“The recent strengthening of the US dollar versus sterling and other currencies … following the UK’s decision to leave the European Union, will have a direct impact on the price we sell to our UK [business] customers and partners.
“The exact price change will vary across our portfolio, and consumer products are currently not affected,” Dell said in a statement.
Smartphone maker OnePlus said it would raise the price of its OnePlus 3 model from £309 to £329 from 11 July, also attributing the hike to the post-Brexit vote fall in the pound.
Even so, City analysts said the Bank was still likely to announce fresh stimulus measures for the economy next month in anticipation that the better-than-expected economic news since the referendum would not last.
The ONS said the unemployment rate had edged down from 5% to 4.9% and was last lower in the July to September period of 2005.London (CNN) Theresa May is meeting with German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin Wednesday on her first international trip as Britain's Prime Minister, for talks that she hopes will help smooth Brexit negotiations.
And that's why I've said already, this will not happen before the end of this year."
But if the referendum campaign has taught us anything, it is that predictions about what would happen after a leave vote were tricky to get right.The prime minister, Theresa May, appears to have indicated that the UK will not invoke article 50 this year.