At least 70 people have been killed in northern Syria after being exposed to a toxic gas that survivors said was dropped from warplanes, an attack that sparked comparisons to the most infamous act of the country’s six-year war.
Theresa May said she was appalled by reports of the attack and called for an investigation by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Jerry Smith, the operations chief of the UN-led team that supervised the removal of Syria’s sarin stockpiles following the gas attack on the rebel-held Ghouta area of Damascus four years ago, said: “This absolutely reeks of 2013 all over again.” In that attack, more than 1,300 people were killed.
“In this most recent attack, dozens of children suffocated to death while they slept,” said Ahmad Tarakji, the head of the Syrian American Medical Society (Sams), which supports hospitals in opposition-controlled areas in Syria.
“Everyone is horrified and the children are in total shock,” said Mohammad Hassoun, a spokesman for civil defence rescue workers in the nearby town of Sarmin, which received 14 of the wounded from Tuesday’s attack.
Chemical weapons attacks in Syria may normalise war crimes, experts warn Read more
“It is one of the most important things now to get biological samples, interviews and environmental samples, ideally from witnesses who can also give statements,” he said.The scale and horror of Tuesday’s gas attack on civilians in Idlib highlighted the vacuum in the Trump administration’s foreign policy making: the incident was met first by silence, then by criticism of Barack Obama.
“These heinous actions by the Bashar al-Assad regime are a consequence of the last administration’s weakness and irresolution,” he said in a statement.
“President Obama said in 2012 that he would establish a ‘red line’ against the use of chemical weapons and then did nothing.”
He pointed out that Obama had set down a “red line” in 2012 on the use of chemical weapons in Syria, but argued that Obama then “did nothing” when the Assad regime carried out a mass gas attack against the town of Ghouta in August 2013.
The families are connected by marriage and both come from Khan Sheikhoun, the village in rebel-held Idlib Province that residents said had been hit with chemical weapons earlier that morning.
“If Donald Trump is happy for this to happen to his own people and his own children,” said Mr. Youssef, “then we’re happy to keep Bashar al-Assad.”
The opposition-run Health Department in Idlib Province, where the attack took place, said 69 people had died, providing a list of their names.
The government of Mr. Assad, who renounced chemical weapons nearly four years ago after a large chemical attack that American intelligence agencies concluded was carried out by his forces, denied that his military had been responsible, as he has done every time chemical munitions have been used in Syria.
A statement from the Syrian military accused insurgents of responsibility and said they had accused the army of using toxic weapons “every time they fail to achieve the goals of their sponsors.”
At the same time, Mr. Trump’s spokesman, Sean Spicer, denounced Mr. Obama for having failed to make good on his famous “red line” statement in 2012, suggesting he would intervene militarily in Syria if Mr. Assad used chemical weapons.
But in August 2013, Mr. Trump exhorted Mr. Obama not to intervene after a chemical weapons attack near Damascus that American intelligence attributed to the Syrian military killed more than 1,400 civilians, including hundreds of children, according to United States government estimates at the time.
“President Obama, do not attack Syria,” Mr. Trump said on Twitter.
Tillerson, who had said that Mr. Assad’s fate “will be decided by the Syrian people,” struck a sharply different tone on Tuesday, urging Mr. Assad’s allies Russia and Iran “to exercise their influence over the Syrian regime and to guarantee that this sort of horrific attack never happens again.”
While chlorine gas attacks have become almost routine in northern Syria, this one was different, medical workers and witnesses said.
A chemical weapons attack, if carried out by the government, would be a brazen statement of impunity, coming during a major international meeting in Brussels where officials are debating whether the European Union and other countries will contribute billions of dollars for reconstructing Syria if it is presided over by a government run by Mr. Assad.Syrian President Bashar al-Assad 's military denied using chemical weapons and blamed rebels for the carnage.
"Today's chemical attack in Syria against innocent people, including women and children, is reprehensible and cannot be ignored by the civilized world," US President Donald Trump said, adding that he thinks the attacks was a consequence of the past administration's weakness and irresolution.
"President Obama said in 2012 that he would establish a 'red line' against the use of chemical weapons and then did nothing."
Horrific reports of chemical weapons attack in #Idlib #Syria.
At first, people were unaware it was a gas attack, Abdullah said.
In an apparent reference to the crisis, two state-run Syrian media outlets earlier reported an explosion at a "rebel poison gas factory" in the countryside of Idlib province, implying that it was an accident related to rebels building chemical weapons.
The tweet was in reference to a 2013 chemical attack on the Damascus suburb of Ghouta, which was blamed on the Syrian regime and prompted US President Barack Obama to threaten military action.
Referring to the 2013 chemical attack, McCain told CNN: "We've seen this movie before, it was when Barack Obama said they would have a red line, they crossed it and he did nothing.
"The regime has been systematically using small scale (chemical) attacks over a long time in order to normalize the use of those attacks," said Haid, an associate fellow at Chatham House, an international policy think tank based in London.
(CNN) White House press secretary Sean Spicer told reporters Tuesday that a gas attack in a rebel-controlled area of Syria was perpetrated by the forces tied to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and are a "consequence of the past administration's weakness and irresolution."
Multiple activist groups in Syria tell CNN that dozens of people, including children, were killed in one of the deadliest suspected gas attacks in years.
A US intelligence official said the attack reportedly killed 58 people, including 11 children.
"If the Assad regime was indeed responsible for perpetrating this attack, the reported casualty figures would make it the biggest incident like this since the Syrian regime sarin attack in August 2013 against the Damascus suburbs."