She said the cabinet would hold an emergency meeting on Wednesday morning but appeared to rule out any negotiations, saying: “Dialogue between democrats takes place within the law, respects the rules of the game and doesn’t make them up as it goes along.”
“There are concerns about lessening the impact of the British referendum on Japan’s small and medium-sized companies,” Ishihara said.
David Donabedian, chief investment officer of Atlantic Trust Private Wealth Management, said: “Markets already appear to be pricing in a full-blown recession in the UK and rising recession risk in the rest of Europe.”
“It is vital the UK retains access to the IEM, which provides stability for energy companies and helps keep household bills down,” said a spokeswoman.
Brexit was a “superb result” for the UK, she said.
“We still want to grow in the UK, particularly in wind power, but clearly a significant change like an exit from the EU introduces more risk to the sector for an unforeseen period of time,” said a spokesman for Vattenfall.
In the first meeting of Parliament since the referendum, Mr. Cameron said he considered the vote binding, though he reiterated that he would leave to his successor the decision to start the formal withdrawal process.
“So I think it is absolutely essential that we stay focused on how, in this transitional period, nobody loses their head, nobody goes off half-cocked, people don’t start ginning up scatterbrained or revengeful premises, but we look for ways to maintain the strength that will serve the interests and the values that brought us together in the first place,” Mr. Kerry said.Of European parliament members: "They don't like me.
Richard Branson, the billionaire founder of Virgin Group, said his company had ditched a planned acquisition after the U.K. voted last Thursday to leave the European Union.
“During the referendum campaign, I said I want my country back,” Mr. Farage said on Monday.
“Brexit means Brexit,” she said firmly, suggesting that if it falls to her to negotiate a British withdrawal from the European Union, she will, as ever, just get on and deal with it."The traditionally very pro-European country has become more euro-sceptic after years of economic stagnation and painful fiscal repair," wrote Holger Schmieding at Berenberg bank.
"The risk of domino effects across the [European Union] and the eurozone looms larger than before."The chief executive of JPMorgan (JPM) said before the June 23 referendum he thought Brexit would be a "terrible deal for the British economy." Asked by an Italian newspaper how the European Union should now respond to the vote, Dimon said it must work together to address its weaknesses.
Despite being part of the Remain camp in the run-up to the referendum, May will push ahead with the UK's divorce from Europe -- "Brexit means Brexit," she said in typically no-nonsense style.
While Scotland voted to remain part of the UK in 2014, with 55% of people voting against independence, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon has now said another independence referendum could be on the table following Brexit.
Joe Grice, chief economist at the ONS, said there was little evidence that concern about a possible Brexit vote had a negative impact on the economy before the referendum.
“The Brexit vote has put the manufacturing sector’s recovery in jeopardy,” said Lee Hopley, chief economist at EEF.
Willie Walsh, the IAG chief executive, said: “Numerous external factors affected our airlines, including the impact of terrorism, uncertainty around the UK’s EU referendum and Spain’s political situation, and increased weakness in Latin American economies.