In an interview Tuesday with PBS, acting Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said Ukraine is struggling to maintain a fighting capability after it was "deliberately dismantled" under Yanukovych.
He said his government ceded Crimea without a shot to demonstrate to the world that Russia was the aggressor, he said.
Instead of the EU, Ukraine would be better off joining Vladimir Putin's rival Eurasian Union, he suggested.
Ukraine wants to be independent from Putin," she said in Russian.
The director of Donetsk's steel plant said he worried what would happen if Russia shut its border to Ukrainian goods.
"The EU doesn't want Ukraine.
Others said that two decades after Ukraine became independent, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, living standards had scarcely improved, with many surviving on pathetically low wages.
But it's certainly true a part of Ukraine's economy is closely connected with Russia." The Kremlin, he added, had numerous economic levers it could pull to sabotage the economy and undermine Kiev.
Moscow, for example, could ban Ukrainian goods, arguing that they don't meet Russian standards, Todorov said.
He said Ukraine's oligarchs were primarily concerned with hanging on to their assets in uncertain times.
Mazur said the problems with Ukraine's economy were profound.
Mr. Corker said more punitive actions should be threatened only if Russia moved farther into Ukraine or threatened neighbors like Moldova.
The people of Crimea have spoken, he says, and voted resoundingly to leave Ukraine and join the Russian Federation.
Primarily, he said, Russia was seeking a federal solution for Ukraine as part of "deep constitutional reform".
Last week, Farage said the European Union had "blood on its hands" for encouraging rebellion in Ukraine, Syria and Libya.
While stressing he did not approve of Putin's annexation of Crimea, he said EU leaders had been "weak and vain", adding: "If you poke the Russian bear with a stick he will respond."
MOSCOW — Moving quickly to envelop Crimea in the Russian bureaucracy and economy, the Kremlin said Monday that it had nearly doubled pensions paid to retirees on the peninsula, raising them to the average levels paid in Russia.
France also helped spearhead the EU’s economic sanctions on Russia over the seizure of Crimea and Russian backing for insurgents in the east of the former Soviet republic.