Spain’s constitutional court suspends the legislation the following day, but the Catalan government vows to press ahead with the vote.
Police arrest 14 Catalan government officials suspected of organising the referendum and announce they have seized nearly 10 million ballots destined for the vote.
The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%.
Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic.
Cameron, who is resigning as prime minister over the EU referendum outcome, will travel to Brussels on Tuesday to discuss the Brexit vote with Europe’s leaders.
Virgin billionaire, Sir Richard Branson, says Chinese business partners are already pulling investment from the UK in the light of the EU referendum vote, and warned that “thousands of jobs will be lost”.
Earlier in the week, Branson, who campaigned for the UK to remain in the EU, called on the government to consider holding a second referendum, “based on the misrepresentations made by the leave campaign”.
The entrepreneur does not have the right to vote in UK elections because he lives in the British Virgin Islands, but has weighed in on the Brexit debate, pointing out that he employs 50,000 people in the UK.In the first meeting of Parliament since the referendum, Mr. Cameron said he considered the vote binding, though he reiterated that he would leave to his successor the decision to start the formal withdrawal process.
Dauvit Broun, a professor of Scottish history at the University of Glasgow, says one driving force for the vote is the widening gulf between the policies pursued by the coalition UK government in Westminster, led by the Conservative Party under Cameron since 2010, and what the Scottish people want.
“During the referendum campaign, I said I want my country back,” Mr. Farage said on Monday.
Despite being part of the Remain camp in the run-up to the referendum, May will push ahead with the UK's divorce from Europe -- "Brexit means Brexit," she said in typically no-nonsense style.
While Scotland voted to remain part of the UK in 2014, with 55% of people voting against independence, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon has now said another independence referendum could be on the table following Brexit.
The priority now is protecting growth from the fall in business confidence, and the risks to future investment, following the Brexit vote.”The report follows a clutch of business surveys this week suggesting the vote to leave the EU could derail Britain’s economy following relatively strong economic growth in the run-up to the referendum.