Standing outside Donetsk's coal mine, Igor Yefremov mused over the future of Ukraine's heavy industry. "If we join the European Union our mines and factories will shut down," he said. "Already the orders from Russia are drying up. Russia doesn't want us because of the chaos in Kiev."
The United States and Europe are united in their support for Ukraine, including the need for economic assistance, and in their efforts to isolate Russia for its intervention in Crimea, Obama said, speaking at an European Union-U.S. summit in Brussels, Belgium.
It has been a tumultuous month for Ukraine. There has been a revolution in Kiev, the abrupt exit of the country's pro-Russian president, Viktor Yanukovych, and military occupation. Russia has seized Crimea, denounced the country's new interim government as "fascist" and launched an all-out information war to justify Crimea's annexation.
The uprising against Yanukovych started last November when he dropped plans to sign an association agreement with the EU, and instead announced a $15bn bailout from Moscow. Last week, Ukraine's new interim prime minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, signed the original agreement in Brussels. In theory, at least, this puts Ukraine on a path towards European integration.
But in the heavily industrialised Donbass area of eastern Ukraine, many are wondering what this geopolitical tug of war might mean for them. The Donets basin – the political home of Yanukovych and his Party of Regions – hosts numerous Soviet-era factories: machine-building works, steel and chemical plants, mines, and medium-sized businesses that make fridges.
At the pithead, Yefromov was gloomy about the mine's prospects. Instead of the EU, Ukraine would be better off joining Vladimir Putin's rival Eurasian Union, he suggested. "It's our only chance," he said.
Lydia Popova, a mine employee for more than four decades, and the editor of its internal newspaper, disagreed. "Joining Russia's customs union is like going back to the USSR. Ukraine wants to be independent from Putin," she said in Russian. "I'm a Ukrainian. The people who work hardest underground here are the Ukrainians."
Popova conceded that many mines in the area had closed, including five in the nearby town named after Alexey Stakhanov, the Soviet coal-miner made famous by the communist party for his quota-busting records. "We are still profitable," she said.
Popova may be right. There is still a demand for coal in Ukraine, even though much of the industry has crumbled. Big factories use coal, as do villagers not connected to the electricity grid. Numerous illegal surface mines known as "kopanki" also exist amid the small, depressed towns of Donbass's outer regions. The new provincial governor, local oligarch Serhiy Taruta, pledged this week to shut the kopanki down.
Donetsk was founded in the 1860s by an enterprising Welshman, John Hughes, who constructed its first steel mill. In recent febrile weeks some pro-Russian campaigners have been calling for Donetsk to follow Crimea and join Russia. More than 7,000 Ukrainians, though, have voted in a spoof online referendum for the city of 1 million to become part of another state – the United Kingdom.
With bankruptcy looming and its currency enfeebled, Ukraine has received offers of help from the International Monetary Fund, the US and the EU. The new interim government says the country is on the brink of default, and accuses Yanukovych and his entourage of stealing $70bn.
There is still a demand for coal in Ukraine, even though much of the industry has crumbled. Photograph: Yves Herman/Reuters
Economists say that Kiev's move towards the EU will have positive and negative consequences. The EU last week abolished import tariffs for Ukrainian goods, previously at 14%. This will help Ukraine's agricultural sector, they suggest – principally businesses that export milk, cheese and sunflower oil. The EU says the deal will help trade between Moscow and Kiev.
But the news is less good for the east's traditional heavy industries, and a potential disaster for its machine-building and metallurgy businesses. Many of their exports traditionally go to Russia and other post-Soviet countries such as Kazakhstan. Steel-making factories, moreover, are heavily dependent on Russian gas supplies. Moscow has signalled that it plans to raise the price Kiev pays from $268.50 per 1,000 cubic metres – the figure Yanukovych agreed with Putin late last year – to about $400.
The director of Donetsk's steel plant said he worried what would happen if Russia shut its border to Ukrainian goods. "This would be deeply unwelcome," Alexander Seliverstov, told Ukraine's news agency UNIAN. "Traditionally 20-25% of our production goes to Russia. Finding an alternative market at a time of continuing economic crisis would be difficult." (Donetsk Steel is undergoing modernisation and at the moment only produces pig iron.)
Since last month pro-Russian protesters have regularly gathered in the city's Lenin Square. Their key demand is federalisation – greater autonomy for the east. Another is that the new government abandons its plan for European integration. "The EU doesn't want Ukraine. And we don't want the EU. We regard the signing of the association agreement as capitulation," an IT programmer, Roman Protsenko, said. Only friendly relations with "brotherly" Russia could bring prosperity, he argued, saying that Russia, Belarus and Ukraine shared history and orthodox religion.
Others said that two decades after Ukraine became independent, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, living standards had scarcely improved, with many surviving on pathetically low wages. Sergey – a 51-year-old anti-Maidan protester – said he was unemployed and that he and his wife, Irina, survived on her salary of $200 a month. "We've put up with these conditions for 23 years," he said, adding: "Russia is like a magnet. It draws weaker states towards it."
One miner says orders from Russia are drying up. He thinks Russia does not want to deal with them because of the chaos in Kiev. Photograph: Yves Herman/Reuters
A professor of international relations, Igor Todorov, said the anti-EU mood among those struggling to get by was understandable: "The main factor here is emotion. But it's certainly true a part of Ukraine's economy is closely connected with Russia." The Kremlin, he added, had numerous economic levers it could pull to sabotage the economy and undermine Kiev. Moscow, for example, could ban Ukrainian goods, arguing that they don't meet Russian standards, Todorov said.
He said Ukraine's oligarchs were primarily concerned with hanging on to their assets in uncertain times. The country's richest man, billionaire Rinat Akhmetov, is from Donetsk, but is currently keeping a low profile.
Down the road from Donetsk is the port of Mariupol, home to two of Ukraine's biggest steel factories. Mariupol, on the sea of Azov, has previously shipped its exports to Bulgaria, Italy and Turkey. Russia, however, now controls Crimea's Kerch Strait, a narrow sea lane connecting the Azov and Black seas. It has also captured practically all of Ukraine's navy. Would Mariupol still be able to function as a port? "The honest answer is that nobody knows," said a lecturer at Mariupol's technical university, Vladislav Mazur.
Mazur said the problems with Ukraine's economy were profound. They pre-dated this latest crisis, he said, and were possibly insoluble. Some factories had moved with the times. They had improved their ecological standards. Most, however, still relied on Soviet-era equipment and production processes. "Not much has been modernised. Nobody cares about the quality of products," he said. Foreign investment might be able to transform crumbling industries, but this would take time, he suggested.
Ultimately, could Ukraine's industrial base – caught between east and west – survive and prosper in the modern world? "Ukraine isn't the modern world," he replied gloomily.But voices just as adamant urged caution, and few lawmakers said they were eager for a military confrontation. Mr. Corker said more punitive actions should be threatened only if Russia moved farther into Ukraine or threatened neighbors like Moldova. Senator Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, another member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said military assistance to a Ukrainian force of about 6,000 trained troops against the Russian military would be fruitless.
“President Obama underscored to President Putin that the United States continues to support a diplomatic path in close consultation with the government of Ukraine and in support of the Ukrainian people with the aim of de-escalation of the crisis,” the White House said in a statement. “President Obama made clear that this remains possible only if Russia pulls back its troops and does not take any steps to further violate Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.”
The US has called on Russia to disarm irregular forces in Crimea, admit international observers and pull its troops back from the eastern border. But speaking to Russian state television before the talks, Lavrov laid out Moscow's own quite different terms for a deal. Primarily, he said, Russia was seeking a federal solution for Ukraine as part of "deep constitutional reform".
Last week, Farage said the European Union had "blood on its hands" for encouraging rebellion in Ukraine, Syria and Libya. While stressing he did not approve of Putin's annexation of Crimea, he said EU leaders had been "weak and vain", adding: "If you poke the Russian bear with a stick he will respond."
In what American officials interpreted as an encouraging sign on Monday that Russia would not invade other regions of Ukraine, the German government released a statement saying Mr. Putin told Chancellor Angela Merkel in a telephone call that he had ordered a partial withdrawal of Russian troops massed on Ukraine’s eastern border, a source of great tension with Western governments in recent weeks.
Putin had cancelled his last scheduled visit to Paris in October after the Kremlin accused France of seeking to humiliate the Russian leader. Moscow cancelled the October trip hours after the then president François Hollande said Russia could face war crimes charges over its bombardment of Aleppo, Syria’s second largest city.“World powers prepare for war in Europe,” one Russian politics site declared in its headline.
This has not just been a marriage of convenience. There are elements of ideological bonding too. In Twitter direct messages during the last throes of the US election campaign, released over the past week, WikiLeaks, which US intelligence has deemed a tool of Russian intelligence, attempted to woo Trump’s eldest son, Donald Trump Jr, with offers of secret collusion.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest The furore that followed the Catalan vote unleashed fake news, Russian mischief and, oddly, libertarian activism. Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images
The messages from the official WikiLeaks account, first published in the Atlantic, ask for a leak of the future president’s tax return to soften the blow of its eventual publication, and to give WikiLeaks the appearance of impartiality given it had already released a trove of documents hacked from the Democratic party (by Russia, according to US intelligence).
WikiLeaks grew steadily bolder in its proposals, urging the Trump campaign not to concede on election night if he lost but to challenge the result as rigged. And in mid-December, when Trump was president-elect, it suggested Trump should push for Assange to be made Australian ambassador to Washington.
Assange also gave his backing to the Brexit vote in the UK, an intervention which again does not appear to be merely incidental. It earned him an unannounced visit in March from Nigel Farage, the Brexit leader and Trump’s closest British ally. When doorstopped on his way out of the Ecuadorian embassy, Farage claimed he could not remember why he had gone there.
However, Snowden has never professed any great enthusiasm for Russian governance, and most of the available evidence suggests he did not end up in Russia by design, but because of a failed scheme, hatched by WikiLeaks to fly him from Hong Kong to Latin America. Unlike Assange, he has been increasingly critical of the Kremlin.
The meeting of minds is embodied in the man long seen as Trump’s chief ideologue, Steve Bannon. Bannon is another western libertarian for whom the contradiction between opposing restrictions on individual liberties at home and backing Russian authoritarianism is subsumed beneath an admiration for Putin’s muscular nationalism.
In the summer of 2014, Bannon explained the attraction of the Russian leader for “traditionalists”, to a meeting of conservative Catholics through a Skype link to the Vatican.
For Farage too, reverence for Putin’s boldness on the world stage has outweighed doubts about his repressive rule. Asked in a 2014 GQ magazine interview, which world leader he most admired, he said: “As an operator, but not as a human being, I would say Putin.
The investigation into the Russian involvement in the Brexit vote is only now getting started. Russian journalist Alexey Kovalev argues Moscow’s influence has been overstated and misunderstood.
Pointing to the minimal audience for the Russian English-language TV channel, Kovalev wrote: “Russian trolling operations seem less like pouring gasoline on fire and more like pouring a bucket of water into the ocean.”
Kadri Liik, an expert on Russian-European relations, said: “Some fake news probably may have influenced the Brexit vote, but these fake news were manufactured by the British tabloids and the leave campaign. Any amplification provided by Russia’s agents was negligible compared to the energy that was invested locally.”
In Catalonia too, Russian bots and their fake news output were pushing on a door that was already swinging open because of other circumstances. The Catalan leaders, unlike those in the US, France, and the UK have shown little interest so far in reciprocating Moscow’s embrace.
In Italy, the Five Star Movement (M5S), combines its anti-establishment stance at home with close alignment to Moscow’s line in foreign policy. Its web guru, Gianroberto Casaleggio, who claims that M5S is pioneering “a new, direct democracy that will see the elimination of all barriers between the citizen and the state”, has established news sites that circulate conspiracy theories, many of them crossposted from Russian outlets. One such story suggested the US was covertly funding the flow of immigrants from Africa. It linked back to a story on Sputnik Italia.
The same patterns were apparent in the Brexit vote, Donald Trump’s shock victory, the surge of the Front National in France and the dramatic ascent of the Five Star Movement in Italy, from the pet project of a comedian, Beppe Grillo, to the second most powerful force in Italy.
In all cases, libertarians viscerally opposed to centralised power made common cause with a brutally autocratic state apparatus in Moscow, an American plutocrat with a deeply murky financial record, and the instinctively authoritarian far right. All in the name of disruption of government and liberal norms in western democracies.
“This libertarian hatred of political correctness, that everyone has to follow this social democratic view on gender, welfare, progressive politics and immigration, and libertarians can’t stand that, as degrading the idea of individual liberty,” Bartlett said. “So I think you’ll find quite a lot of people on the libertarian right who think that Russia has become the only real counterbalance to that philosophy.”
“One of the reasons is that they believe that at least Putin is standing up for traditional institutions, and he’s trying to do it in a form of nationalism – and I think that people, particularly in certain countries, want to see sovereignty for their country, they want to see nationalism for their country,” Bannon said, according to a transcript of the discussion published by BuzzFeed.
“The way he played the whole Syria thing. Brilliant. Not that I approve of him politically. How many journalists in jail now?”
However, the long-term corrosive effect of Russia’s use of disinformation to break down trust in western institutions is hard to measure and may be unmeasurable. What is clear is that it is continuing with the active assistance of political movements who trade in disillusion and resentment, and who have found a natural home on the internet.
As with Assange, Casaleggio’s distaste for the overbearing state does not apply to Moscow. The common fight against US, Nato and the rest of the western world’s liberal order is what has taken primacy.
“I think they’re more anarchic in their belief that the state will wither away and power will be redistributed in some fundamentally democratic revolution that they thought would be embedded within the internet,” said Franklin Foer, a US journalist and the author of World Without Mind: The Existential Threat of Big Tech. “It’s fairly naive, because power always reasserts itself.”In recent weeks, it has become increasingly clear that Brexit was another arena in which Assange and Moscow were in step. Over the past week, researchers at the University of Edinburgh identified more than 400 fake Twitter accounts apparently run from St Petersburg, which published Brexit-related posts in the run-up to the UK referendum, some of them aimed at stirring anti-Islamic sentiment.
“The radical libertarians and the autocrats are allied by virtue of sharing an enemy which is the mainstream, soft, establishment, liberal politics,” said Jamie Bartlett, the director of the centre for the analysis of social media at the Demos thinktank.
That meant some odd bedfellows could become useful allies. “They have been able to forge a very convenient marriage with other enemies of liberal democracy,” said Bartlett, “who are in every other sense imaginable completely at odds with each other, but they do share that common hatred of establishment, western, soft, democratic politics as they see it.”
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Trump and Hillary Clinton at the debate in St Louis in October last year. Photograph: Rick Wilking/Reuters
But there are plenty of other examples of the mutual embrace between Moscow and western libertarianism. In particular, the libertarians share with Moscow a profound distaste for the European Union, which they see as a continent-wide epitome of centralisation, and of liberal social norms.
In second place was Edward Snowden, another champion of transparency, who like Assange had little by way of a track record on Spanish politics. Together, Snowden and Assange accounted for a third of all Twitter traffic under the #Catalonia hashtag.
He turned against his employers in the US security apparatus, and stole their secrets in the name of transparency and the citizen’s right to privacy, but his defection has left him in exile in Moscow, at the mercy of a government that hardly even pretends to observe such western niceties.
