Since last month pro-Russian protesters have regularly gathered in the city's Lenin Square. Their key demand is federalisation – greater autonomy for the east. Another is that the new government abandons its plan for European integration. "The EU doesn't want Ukraine. And we don't want the EU. We regard the signing of the association agreement as capitulation," an IT programmer, Roman Protsenko, said. Only friendly relations with "brotherly" Russia could bring prosperity, he argued, saying that Russia, Belarus and Ukraine shared history and orthodox religion.
In an interview Tuesday with PBS, acting Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said Ukraine is struggling to maintain a fighting capability after it was "deliberately dismantled" under Yanukovych. He said his government ceded Crimea without a shot to demonstrate to the world that Russia was the aggressor, he said. But if Moscow moves against another portion of Ukraine, "We will fight."
Others said that two decades after Ukraine became independent, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, living standards had scarcely improved, with many surviving on pathetically low wages. Sergey – a 51-year-old anti-Maidan protester – said he was unemployed and that he and his wife, Irina, survived on her salary of $200 a month. "We've put up with these conditions for 23 years," he said, adding: "Russia is like a magnet. It draws weaker states towards it."
Mazur said the problems with Ukraine's economy were profound. They pre-dated this latest crisis, he said, and were possibly insoluble. Some factories had moved with the times. They had improved their ecological standards. Most, however, still relied on Soviet-era equipment and production processes. "Not much has been modernised. Nobody cares about the quality of products," he said. Foreign investment might be able to transform crumbling industries, but this would take time, he suggested.
But voices just as adamant urged caution, and few lawmakers said they were eager for a military confrontation. Mr. Corker said more punitive actions should be threatened only if Russia moved farther into Ukraine or threatened neighbors like Moldova. Senator Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, another member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said military assistance to a Ukrainian force of about 6,000 trained troops against the Russian military would be fruitless.
Russia has said its troops are carrying out snap military exercises in the region.
Also in Moscow, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu said that Ukrainian troops in Crimea who had chosen to remain in the Ukrainian Armed Forces had withdrawn. "The change in state symbols on all ships and in all divisions that have sided with the Russian army has been completed," he said. 
“It is the whole idea of flight to safety,” said Edward A. Mermelstein, a real estate lawyer who does a lot of business in Russia, and who says he is fielding more calls now from clients in the region. “Anytime there is uncertainty overseas, it is a good time to bring money to the U.S.”
Victoria Shtainer, an associate broker at Douglas Elliman Real Estate, has felt the chill firsthand. She had been working with a Russian buyer, a legislator, since December. With a budget of $25 million to $52 million, he had been considering listings at the Plaza Hotel and the Marquand, a new development at 11 East 68th Street. He was coming to New York for a visit this month when Russian forces invaded Crimea. Soon afterward, Ms. Shtainer learned via an email that “due to relations with the U.S., he was canceling his trip,” she said. “It said he wanted to wait until things quieted down.” Another of Ms. Shtainer’s Russian clients, who had been looking for an apartment in the $4 million to $5 million range, also canceled a visit. “She told me she was afraid to get a visa, that they were just going to wait it out,” Ms. Shtainer said.
