It may take a while to determine why the South Korean ferry Sewol turned on its side and sank last Wednesday, but already now we know that the image of its captain, Lee Jun-seok, walking to safety even as scores of high school students were struggling desperately for their lives in the capsized hull, has already entered the annals of shame.
The duty to put the safety of the travelers entrusted to a captain’s care ahead of his or her own is one of the most enduring traditions of travel on sea, air or land. Yes, it would have taken courage to stay behind and fight to save the young lives for which the captain and crew were responsible — and there were those who did that. Yet Captain Lee and two-thirds of the crew survived, while two-thirds of the 476 passengers — 325 of whom were 16- and 17-year-old students from the Danwon High School near Seoul off on an excursion — are dead or missing. The president of South Korea, Park Geun-hye, called it “like a murderous act that can never be understood or forgiven.”
Whether Captain Lee could have prevented the capsizing of the ferry had he, and not a junior officer, been on the bridge is another question, one of many. Why did the ship suddenly lurch to one side and begin listing? Why did crewmen fail to order passengers to abandon ship and instead urged them to stay below decks? Why was there such a lack of preparedness? Why did the government take so long to respond to the anguish of parents?
These require answers — and actions. This is not South Korea’s first such accident. In December 1970, the Namyoung sank with 323 fatalities, and, in October 1993, the sinking of the Seohae took 292 lives. The South Koreans will demand far higher safety standards and enforcement.
The authorities in other countries should also review their laws and procedures. Many such pledges were made after the Italian cruise ship Costa Concordia struck a rock and was wrecked in the Mediterranean in 2012, with the loss of 32 lives, yet the fate of the Sewol shows that much remains to be done on planning for emergency evacuations. The Costa Concordia, of course, is notorious also for the flight of the captain, Francesco Schettino, before most of the passengers were rescued. Mr. Schettino is currently on trial, charged with causing a shipwreck, manslaughter and abandoning ship. Captain Lee and six crew members of the Sewol have also been arrested. Under South Korean law, abandoning passengers at a time of crisis is punishable by life in prison.