Gravitational waves: 'we can hear the universe' – live Read more
Turner, a cosmologist at the University of Chicago, noted that astronomers had once referred to the search for gravitational waves as an experiment, not an observatory.
For example, so-called Dark Energy, which drives the accelerating expansion of the universe, may affect the way gravitational waves travel to Earth from their distant sources, and that means we might get some clues as to what Dark Energy actually is.
Gravitational waves are obviously a lot harder to see than electromagnetic waves – light, radio, microwaves – but if we think how much we have learned from astronomy using ripples in electromagnetic fields, it is impossible not to be thrilled by the prospect of studying the universe using ripples in spacetime itself.
His book Smashing Physics: The Inside Story of the Hunt for the Higgs was published in May 2014Physicists have announced the discovery of gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric of spacetime that were first anticipated by Albert Einstein a century ago.
We did it,” said David Reitze, executive director of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (Ligo), at a press conference in Washington.
Gravitational waves carry completely different information about phenomena in the universe.
But – given half a century of frustration in the search for gravitational waves – what they found exceeded expectation: suddenly, in the mutual collapse of two black holes, they could eavesdrop on the violence of the universe.
“The colliding black holes that produced these gravitational waves created a violent storm in the fabric of space and time, a storm in which time speeded up and slowed down, and speeded up again, a storm in which the shape of space was bent in this way and that way,” he said.
Now we have gravitational waves we are going to have a whole new picture of the universe, of the stuff that doesn’t emit light – dark matter, black holes,” he said.
Just over 100 years after he published his general theory of relativity, scientists have found what Albert Einstein predicted as part of the theory: gravitational waves.
We did it," said David Reitze, executive director of LIGO, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory , which was created to do just what Reitze announced.
The gravitational waves -- ripples in space-time -- were created by the merging of two black holes, Reitze said.
Gravitational waves pass through everything, so the result traveled through the universe for that time before reaching Earth.
The gravitational waves stretched and compressed space around Earth "like Jell-O," said Reitze.
Though gravitational waves aren't sound waves, the increase in frequency the collision exhibited in its last milliseconds -- when the black holes were mere kilometers apart and growing closer -- is a frequency we can hear, said Deirdre Shoemaker, a Georgia Tech physicist who works on LIGO.
LIGO is described as "a system of two identical detectors" -- one located in Livingston, Louisiana, the other in Hanford, Washington -- "carefully constructed to detect incredibly tiny vibrations from passing gravitational waves." The project was created by scientists from Caltech and MIT and funded by the National Science Foundation.
Gravitational waves were predicted by Einstein in his general theory of relativity in 1915, the theory that proposed space-time as a concept.
Scientists have what they call a "five-sigma" standard of proof, and LIGO's researchers say the gravitational wave discovery exceeds that.
"I think we're opening a window on the universe -- a window of gravitational wave astronomy."
Columbia University physicist Marka, who's been working on the project for more than a decade, said the discovery will open up new horizons, including direct tests of Einstein's general theory.
"He thought gravitational waves are a beautiful construct, but they are so small nobody would ever be able to actually measure it," said Marka.The South Dakota scientists, whose lab is called the Large Underground Xenon (LUX), are not the only hunters at large.
Dubbed “gevolution”, the tool will for the first time allow researchers to take into account the effect of ripples in spacetime - known as gravitational waves - and could help shed light on dark energy, the mysterious force driving the universe’s accelerated expansion.
“You can see now a simulation of how spacetime is dragged around - the ‘frame-dragging’ effect - by the movement of matter and also how gravitational waves would be generated by the matter which moves around,” he says.
They may be only small corrections to the Newtonian predictions, but we should include them to make totally rigorous calculations for the next generation of telescopes.” She adds: “Also they have a bearing on ruling out models of dark matter and dark energy, arguably the biggest problems in current cosmology.”“I think it is an important step forward,” said Professor Jo Dunkley of the University of Oxford, who was not involved in the study.