British expats could forfeit their rights to live in Spain if they vote to leave the EU, the Spanish prime minister has warned, saying forgoing free movement rights would be “negative for everyone”.
Leave campaigners have argued that new rights for British citizens to live and work in other EU countries could be negotiated after Brexit.
Free movement and its effects on migration to the UK is one of the key issues for voters, according to new polling conducted by Vote Leave, which found almost half of those surveyed said levels of migration from the other 27 EU countries had been bad for the UK, against 26% who thought it had benefited Britain.If you want to have your say on the future of Britain’s role in the EU, you need to be on the electoral register, which means registering to vote.
But it is quite unclear what that mandate might be, as the referendum question does not specify the range of alternatives to full EU membership should the UK vote to leave.
A leave vote would therefore need to be followed by an emergency debate in parliament from Monday 27 June onwards about the UK’s withdrawal options, where the most likely outcome, as you indicate, would be overwhelming support for the UK to remain in EEA, which would of course outrage hard-line Brexiters in the Conservative party.
A British vote to leave the EU could be the start of turbulent times for Europe.
Vote Leave, the official out campaign, responded to leaks of the plans by accusing the chancellor of breaking seven key Tory pledges on which they were elected last year, and set out a competing vision of a post-Brexit world in which Britain would claw back money from the EU.
Recent polls are showing that support in Britain for leaving the European Union is on the rise: More voters are backing a departure from the bloc than are opting to stay.
“While recognising that this choice is for UK voters to make and that their decisions will reflect both economic and non-economic factors, directors agreed that the net economic effects of leaving the EU would likely be negative and substantial,” they said in a press release accompanying the report.
I want people to know what the consequences of leaving the EU would be before they cast their votes, rather than after.
A vote to leave could see the week end with a Black Friday, and serious consequences for ordinary people.The pound’s fall, which stunned investors, was its biggest ever one-day fall, and ranked with the reaction to the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008 and Britain’s exit in 1992 from the European exchange rate mechanism on Black Wednesday.
(CNN) Scotland will likely seek independence for a second time this decade after the historic vote for the United Kingdom to leave the European Union, Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said Friday.
The spokesman said a decision on a future British commissioner would fall to Cameron’s successor: “It will be for the next prime minister to decide, following discussions with European partners, what role the UK plays in the European commission, given we remain a full member of the EU until we have left.”During the referendum campaign, Prime Minister David Cameron, who led the Remain campaign, repeatedly said that a Leave victory would automatically result in the triggering of Article 50.
Despite fronting the campaign to leave the EU and being “most trusted” by voters on the issues, the former London mayor Boris Johnson was judged by intimate insiders not to be up to the task of negotiating complex Brexit agreements, his heart not really in it either.
The result made clear the existential threat that this poses to the Labour party now – and in the foreseeable future, unless it can square the circle, to the Conservative party too.Scottish voters are reconsidering their opposition to independence after the Brexit vote, the SNP’s business convener, Derek Mackay, has said, despite a poll that found a majority still favoured being part of the UK outside the EU.
The arithmetic told us that motivating and mobilising pro-EU voters would be nowhere near enough; we would also need the votes of people whose underlying attitudes meant they would find the leave campaign’s arguments compelling and would be hard to persuade.
These voters were overwhelmingly going to vote leave, regardless of the arguments.
These people were the in-play voters: the primary target for both campaigns in the EU referendum.
On 23 June 2016 they voted in favour of leaving the EU by about the same margin.
“While Scottish independence has been mooted in the wake of the vote to leave the EU, a new referendum is not currently on the table.
Saturday’s findings follow another recent poll which found almost a third of voters wanted to wait until the UK’s deal with the EU was clear before deciding whether to hold another independence referendum.The research to map out the campaign to keep Britain in the European Union started more than a year before the referendum.