"These visits will be an opportunity to forge a strong working relationship that we can build upon and which I hope to develop with more leaders across the European Union in the weeks and months ahead," May said in a statement Wednesday.
"If it's a sustained and large increase in price, which it isn't at this point, then Ukraine could have an impact but bear in mind that prices are still lower than at the end of 2012," Watts said.Lenovo, the world’s biggest maker of personal computers, has said it is considering price increases in reaction to sterling’s fall.
Other computer makers are likely to increase UK prices following the pound’s fall to 31-year lows this week – a drop of more than 10% since the referendum.
“The recent strengthening of the US dollar versus sterling and other currencies … following the UK’s decision to leave the European Union, will have a direct impact on the price we sell to our UK [business] customers and partners.
Smartphone maker OnePlus said it would raise the price of its OnePlus 3 model from £309 to £329 from 11 July, also attributing the hike to the post-Brexit vote fall in the pound.
Even so, City analysts said the Bank was still likely to announce fresh stimulus measures for the economy next month in anticipation that the better-than-expected economic news since the referendum would not last.
The agents’ report was released at the same time as the Office for National Statistics reported that the labour market remained solid in the period from March to May, the first three months of the referendum campaign, with the jobless rate falling to its lowest level in more than a decade.
The ONS said the unemployment rate had edged down from 5% to 4.9% and was last lower in the July to September period of 2005.London (CNN) Theresa May is meeting with German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin Wednesday on her first international trip as Britain's Prime Minister, for talks that she hopes will help smooth Brexit negotiations.
And that's why I've said already, this will not happen before the end of this year."
November will be the first time we see unemployment figures fully calculated post-referendum, comparing July, August and September 2016 with the months prior to the vote.
But if the referendum campaign has taught us anything, it is that predictions about what would happen after a leave vote were tricky to get right.The prime minister, Theresa May, appears to have indicated that the UK will not invoke article 50 this year.