Crimea belonged to Russia until 1954, when it was given to Ukraine, which was then part of the Soviet Union.
Instead of the EU, Ukraine would be better off joining Vladimir Putin's rival Eurasian Union, he suggested.
Ukraine wants to be independent from Putin," she said in Russian.
In recent febrile weeks some pro-Russian campaigners have been calling for Donetsk to follow Crimea and join Russia.
The director of Donetsk's steel plant said he worried what would happen if Russia shut its border to Ukrainian goods.
Others said that two decades after Ukraine became independent, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, living standards had scarcely improved, with many surviving on pathetically low wages.
"We've put up with these conditions for 23 years," he said, adding: "Russia is like a magnet.
But it's certainly true a part of Ukraine's economy is closely connected with Russia." The Kremlin, he added, had numerous economic levers it could pull to sabotage the economy and undermine Kiev.
Moscow, for example, could ban Ukrainian goods, arguing that they don't meet Russian standards, Todorov said.
Down the road from Donetsk is the port of Mariupol, home to two of Ukraine's biggest steel factories.
Mazur said the problems with Ukraine's economy were profound.
Speaking to the state-run newspaper Rossiskaya Gazeta, in comments first noted by the Moscow Times, Seagal described western policy on Ukraine as "idiotic".
He said Putin's desire "to protect the Russian-speaking people of Crimea, his assets, and the Russian Black Sea military base in Sevastopol … [was] very reasonable".
Moldova has been working toward the same sweeping political and free trade agreements with the European Union that prompted Russian opposition in Ukraine.
Barack Obama urged Russian president Vladimir Putin to pull his troops back from the border with Ukraine during an hour-long phone call Friday.
The Russian leader, who initiated the call, asserted that Ukraine's government is allowing extremists to intimidate civilians with impunity.
The Russian has drawn international condemnation over his support for Syria's Bashar al-Assad and annexation of the Crimean region of Ukraine.
Officials also announced a number of new investment plans and tax breaks for Crimea, which Russia seized from Ukraine two weeks ago after a rushed vote in the Crimean Legislature.
France also helped spearhead the EU’s economic sanctions on Russia over the seizure of Crimea and Russian backing for insurgents in the east of the former Soviet republic.
Putin’s Versailles visit meant Macron was the first western leader to speak to Putin following the G7 summit this weekend, where western leaders agreed to consider new measures against Moscow if the situation in Ukraine did not improve.
Bannon is another western libertarian for whom the contradiction between opposing restrictions on individual liberties at home and backing Russian authoritarianism is subsumed beneath an admiration for Putin’s muscular nationalism.
“They have been able to forge a very convenient marriage with other enemies of liberal democracy,” said Bartlett, “who are in every other sense imaginable completely at odds with each other, but they do share that common hatred of establishment, western, soft, democratic politics as they see it.”