Carles Puigdemont, the leader of Catalonia, assured the region’s voters that the independence referendum would take place, despite efforts by the Madrid government and Spanish courts to block it.
This time, Catalonia’s government has promised that the referendum will be binding, even if it is declared illegal by Spain’s constitutional court and even if Catalan opponents of independence boycott it.
In response, Carles Puigdemont, the leader of Catalonia, told Catalan television that no politician or court in Madrid could stop the referendum.
Madrid says the referendum is unconstitutional and so are the laws the Catalan parliament passed a week ago, which will in effect disconnect Catalonia from Spanish legislative and administrative control if the Yes vote prevails.
On Friday, the Spanish government announced that it would send more police officers to Catalonia to maintain order and block a referendum; additional officers are being billeted in ferries off the Catalan coast.
BARCELONA, Spain — Separatist lawmakers declared Catalonia’s independence from Spain on Oct. 27, prompting the central government of Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy to take administrative control of the region, oust Catalan leaders and schedule elections on Dec. 21.
(CNN) Catalonia's separatist government is adamant it will go ahead with a referendum on October 1 to decide if the region should split from Spain, despite the country's highest court banning the vote.
Spain’s constitutional court suspends the legislation the following day, but the Catalan government vows to press ahead with the vote.
The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%.
Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic.
Mr. Rajoy’s comments on Wednesday were his first formal response to the events of the previous evening, when Mr. Puigdemont appeared to declare independence from Spain in an address to the Catalan Parliament — then immediately suspended that decision to allow for more “dialogue” with Madrid.
Yet Catalan President Puigdemont, who feels he's answered European Council President Donald Tusk's call to avoid an escalation by seeking talks rather than immediately declaring independence, believes the EU is obliged to help him deliver the independence for which his people voted.
In a statement from Madrid, the government of Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy said it would invoke Article 155 of the constitution, a provision that allows the central government to suspend the autonomy of the Catalan regional administration.
In response the Catalan leader, Carles Puigdemont, has threatened to press ahead with a declaration of independence (currently “suspended”, although the region’s parliament hasn’t yet formally voted on it).
Barcelona, Spain (CNN) Catalan leaders have insisted they will reject any attempt by Madrid to impose direct rule on their autonomous region, as a political crisis escalates over Catalonia's threats to declare independence from Spain.
After the referendum, the struggle over Catalonia intensified in an often confusing exchange between the Catalan leader, Carles Puigdemont, and Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of Spain.
After weeks of equivocating, Mr. Puigdemont told the Spanish authorities that Catalan lawmakers might vote for independence.
Catalan President Carles Puigdemont said he had considered the option of dissolving the regional Parliament and calling new elections, in what appeared to be a last-ditch effort to stop Madrid from taking control of the region.
• Your report (Catalan vice-president says independence is the only remaining option, 26 October) repeats yet again the claim that “770,000 votes were lost after Spanish police stepped in to try to halt the vote” during the referendum on 1 October.
MADRID — The former leader of Catalonia, Carles Puigdemont, will not appear on Thursday before a Spanish judge to face possible charges — including rebellion — arising from his government’s declaration of independence for the region, his Belgian lawyer said.