National Grid has issued a warning that energy bills would rise and energy security would fall if, like Switzerland, the UK was excluded from Europe’s IEM.
“It is vital the UK retains access to the IEM, which provides stability for energy companies and helps keep household bills down,” said a spokeswoman.
The issue of energy needs to be treated with the highest importance by the government as the negotiations on Britain’s exit begin.”
“The UK government should be mindful of the importance the harmonisation of the [UK] energy market with the countries in Europe can have on efforts to deliver clean, secure and affordable energy.
Collaboration with other European countries on energy matters is important for UK consumers,” it said in a statement.
Prof Paul Younger, at the University of Glasgow, said the vote to leave “blasts a hole” in the embryonic EU energy union, which would provide a huge market for the UK’s large offshore wind and tidal resources, as well as smooth out the intermittency of rising renewable energy.
The first must be confirmation of the 5th carbon budget, which will hopefully give some confidence in the long-term direction of UK energy policy.” Under UK law, the government has until Thursday to accept or reject the latest carbon-cutting proposals from its own climate advisers.
Jonathan Gaventa, from thinktank E3G, said that legal EU targets for renewable energy for 2020 had been a major catalyst for investment, but that the bloc’s 2030 target is not nationally binding: “So current UK renewable energy investment is driven by the underlying need for clean energy in the UK.
The entrepreneur does not have the right to vote in UK elections because he lives in the British Virgin Islands, but has weighed in on the Brexit debate, pointing out that he employs 50,000 people in the UK.Fresh off the boos and turned backs that greeted his appearance at the European Council earlier in the day, Farage said warnings of economic chaos following the vote won't come to pass, but suggested even if they do, it would be worth it.
The priority now is protecting growth from the fall in business confidence, and the risks to future investment, following the Brexit vote.”The report follows a clutch of business surveys this week suggesting the vote to leave the EU could derail Britain’s economy following relatively strong economic growth in the run-up to the referendum.