On a stage in Revolution Square, the pro-Kremlin theater director and conservative agitator Sergei Y. Kurginyan stirred up the crowd, saying, “We must rally together and state that there will be no Maidan in Moscow.”
He passed on reports from the Ukrainian city of Kharkiv, where two people were fatally shot Friday night during a raid on a house said to be a base for radical nationalists.
“The violence is escalating,” Mr. Kurginyan said. “We are getting more and more information. Once again blood has been shed. Once again there is violence, everywhere violence. I am appealing to people who really don’t like it when we speak of our ideology. We are not talking about ideology right now, my dear ones. I am talking about your civil rights.”
Photo
Across town, at the antiwar march, the turnout was higher than many expected, and some women wore flower garlands in their hair, like Ukrainian folk dancers. Opponents of intervention in Ukraine have found themselves isolated as the crisis has mounted, and several marchers acknowledged that differences over Crimea had split their families or social circles. But the large crowd — numbers that the Kremlin could not ignore — made the mood buoyant.
“With Crimea, it is obvious that, in my view, it was a historic mistake to make it part of Ukraine, but the way Russia is trying to get it back is a mistake two times bigger,” said Andrei A. Yegorshev, a journalist at a state radio station.
Elisabeth Mouravieff, 73, said she had joined the march in spite of her conviction that “Crimea is Russia.” She said Mr. Putin was being driven by his “imperial mood” and the sense that his own government could face a wave of protest like the one that toppled Ukraine’s president.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
“I came because I couldn’t not come,” she said. “The atmosphere is darkening. It is troubling. It is very frightening that the authorities are provoking violence between Russians and Ukrainians. I also came because of my anger at the lies of the mass media.”
It has been a grim few weeks for Russian liberals, whose burst of influence during the antigovernment protests of 2011 and 2012 has melted away.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
While the world’s attention is trained on Ukraine, the Russian authorities are cracking down on independent news outlets here, and scores of young journalists — a group that drove the protests — are facing unemployment. Several major cable and Internet providers have dropped the liberal-leaning news broadcaster Dozhd, a flagship project that began when Dmitri A. Medvedev was president, and its general director has announced that it will close within two months.
On Wednesday, the editor of a respected independent news site, Lenta.ru, was abruptly replaced with a pro-government journalist after the site published an interview with a Ukrainian nationalist. Thirty-nine of the site’s 84 employees resigned in solidarity.
On Thursday, three opposition websites and a blog were blocked by the government’s communications watchdog, the first use of a new law that came into effect last month, which allows sites to be blocked without a court order. Ominously, several Internet providers also temporarily blocked access to the website of Ekho Moskvy, the radio station that has served as the primary gathering place for liberal intellectuals since the days of Boris N. Yeltsin in the 1990s.
Maria Baronova, an opposition activist who works at Dozhd, said that at some point it had all become too much for her.
“To be honest, I drank yesterday as if it was the last time,” she wrote on Twitter. “For the first time in my life, I drank not in the framework of fun, but simply so that I would not think.”