This war continues today, as the ideologues of the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin , are trying to sell their virtual reality not only to Ukrainians, but to the world. This latest phase of the war has been underway for three months, while Ukrainians kept watch on the Maidan, treated the wounded, held at bay those troops who were ready to slaughter their own people and fought for the right to create a new state, free of corruption, all the while stunned by the disinterest of the international community.
Now that Russia has declared not only virtual war on Ukraine, but also real war, now that the first conscripts have been mobilized by Kiev, we all realize that still worse lies in store for us.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
On March 1, Maidan-affiliated activists were attacked by forces imported from Russia. Among the hundred or so injured was one of Ukraine’s most beloved poets, Serhiy Zhadan, whose head was sliced open in two places. The Russian flag was raised over buildings housing local governments. Just a few hours later videos appeared on YouTube showing these Russian agitators divvying up the money they were getting for their performances.
It is important to watch the ideological war playing out alongside the possibility of a military conflict. Mr. Putin wants Ukrainians and the world to believe that the eastern half of the country supports him. And, indeed, myths and stereotypes have a way of breeding along the country’s endless, poorly maintained roads. They are already deeply rooted in the Ukrainian mind: The myth of the aggressive nationalist from the west has long had as its counterpart the equally unfounded myth of the Russian-speaking easterner who, brainwashed by Russian propaganda, would take slavery in a totalitarian state over membership in NATO or the European Union .
These myths were most apparent during the Orange Revolution of 2004, and they have been used by both sides to gain power. In the east, people are terrified of the “Orange Plague ”; in the west, people are terrified of “Donetsk criminals.” As long as these myths were believed, the political forces in question have been able to use power for their own gain, sustaining the people on political speculations and intimidation instead of enacting meaningful economic reforms.
But those myths are collapsing; that is what the 2014 protests were all about. Both eastern and western camps had a chance at ruling, and both failed. In doing so, they showed Ukrainians that the challenge was not between one region or another, but between the corrupt at the top and the people, whatever region they are from. Politicians today are finally being asked for plans of action that will actually achieve things, rather than populist slogans or ideological myths.
In recent days, in cities across the region, people have gathered to protest Russian aggression. Thanks to Mr. Putin, Ukraine has seen a rise not only in Russian-speaking Ukrainian patriots, but also “Russian-speaking Russophobes,” who identify as Russian but want nothing to do with him.
Russia’s ideological war with Ukraine is doomed to fail within Ukrainian society. Its victims exist only in the willful isolation of the pro-Russian media. Now we must avert the danger of real war — or else win it.