Redeployments have cut the American military presence in Europe to 67,000 troops, a fraction of the almost 280,000 United States Army personnel in Europe in 1962. British troops, once so cozily ensconced that they ran their own fly-fishing club in the Eifel hills, are set for a major drawdown in Germany in 2015 and a complete withdrawal by 2020 as part of broader cuts in defense spending. Already their numbers have fallen to 20,000 from around 50,000.
So what might the newest saber-rattling achieve?
“The cold war dinosaurs who still tramp the corridors and editorial columns of London and Washington seem almost to pine for the virile certainties of 1945-1989,” the columnist Simon Jenkins wrote in London’s Guardian newspaper. “Russia must ‘pay a heavy price’ for Crimea, if only to make cold warriors feel good.”
“That is unlikely to make the bear slink back to its cave,” he said, referring to Russia.
The calculation might help explain why Chancellor Angela Merkel has been among the most cautious of European leaders in formulating the Western response to Mr. Putin.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Far more than most, Germans know from their history the perils of unpicking the patchwork of frontiers holding their continent together. They are aware, too, of hair-trigger sensitivities bequeathed by the clash of empires, as if the Cold War had merely spread an ideological fig leaf over a far older contest.
“I’m very worried the unlawful attempt to alter recognized borders in our European neighborhood, 25 years after the end of the cold war, will open Pandora’s box,” said Germany’s foreign minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier.
It is debatable whether the talk of a new Cold War should come as any surprise after the litany of disputes between Moscow and the West, from the jailing of the protest group Pussy Riot to the war in Syria.
Almost seven years ago, the reflexes of Cold War diplomacy re-emerged after the killing in London of the Russian whistle-blower Alexander V. Litvinenko, prompting tit-for-tat diplomatic expulsions redolent of an earlier era.
Thereafter, the British authorities, bowing to Moscow’s financial and diplomatic power, stifled his widow’s campaign for full and public disclosure of the circumstances surrounding Mr. Litvinenko’s death — a triumph of expediency over justice.
That may have been a moment when Western resolve was seen to waver.
By the laws of unintended consequences, the debate reopened this week when Donald Anderson, a lawmaker in the House of Lords, said there had been “a scintilla of plausibility” in the notion that Britain should avoid baiting Russia over the Litvinenko affair. After the annexation of Crimea, he said, “all that has gone, and justice should now be done.”