While mostly welcomed by the West, the agreement to send monitors pointedly excluded Crimea, drawing condemnation from some countries.
Photo
A statement from Russia said that excluding Crimea “reflects the new political-legal realities” because it has “become part of Russia.”
Germany , however, moved swiftly to dispel the idea that the exclusion of Crimea constituted any recognition of the peninsula’s annexation. “The O.S.C.E. is expressly not casting into doubt the territorial integrity of Ukraine,” a government spokesman said, according to Reuters.
The military operations on Saturday — including the reported takeover of another base at Novofyodorovka — seemed to add an exclamation mark to Russia’s stance that the facts were settled, as its forces and loosely organized local militias moved to finish the ousting of Ukrainian military personnel from Crimea. The Kremlin has invited Ukrainian service members, who once numbered in the thousands, to join the Russian military with no change in rank and potentially increased pay, but many have declined.
The pace of surrender by Ukrainian forces had begun accelerating on Wednesday, after the Defense Ministry in Kiev said it had drawn up plans to evacuate its military personnel, effectively yielding to the reality of the Russian occupation that began late last month.
Belbek, where Ukrainian troops had held their ground against threats earlier in the Russian occupation, was something of a holdout.
In interviews before the takeover Saturday, soldiers expressed frustration with the lack of help from the their government in Kiev. Some troops said they were defending the base as a matter of honor, having sworn to serve the people and government of Ukraine.
Video
“I took an oath,” said one commander, adding that he felt no personal antipathy toward Russia or Russians.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
The sense of abandonment was echoed at other bases where soldiers and marines began to pack up their belongings last week, accepting that their cause was lost.
“It’s not just a gap between us, it’s a gulf,” said Lyudmila, an officer at a base in Yevpatoriya, who declined to give her surname. “They don’t value our patriotism. They have done nothing to protect us, they only talk.”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
Even amid the withdrawals last week, communication between the military here in Crimea and superiors in Kiev seemed strained. The head spokesman for the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense in Crimea, Vladislav Seleznev, was left reporting developments to Kiev through his personal Facebook page.
At Belbek on Saturday, tensions rose throughout the day after Russian forces issued an ultimatum, warning of an attack if the Ukrainians did not relinquish control. In the streets outside the base, scores of armed local militiamen, many wearing masks, gathered to support the siege.
After scattered verbal exchanges between the Ukrainians and the Russian soldiers gathered outside the base’s black iron fence, the Russian mobilization began at about 5 p.m. One armored vehicle smashed through the main gate, while a second broke through a cement wall a short distance away.
Photo
There were sporadic bursts of gunfire, and several loud bangs from smoke grenades. At least one Russian soldier fired a handgun into the air repeatedly, and at least one person was wounded, beaten by Russian special forces. It was unclear if the man, who was photographed in civilian clothes, was a soldier or a journalist.
For a time, the Ukrainians were surrounded, but by early evening most, if not all, had been disarmed and sent to collect their belongings, and by nightfall the base was quiet, with its perimeter sealed and guarded by Russian soldiers. It was unclear if Ukrainian personnel remained on the base.
The emotional whiplash of Crimea’s sudden secession from Ukraine and annexation by Russia was evident among soldiers and their families throughout Crimea last week trying to decide whether to stay on the peninsula or cross what the Russians have now effectively declared to be a new international border.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Col. Igor Mamchur, deputy commander of the marine garrison in Simferopol, where the Russian flag was flying last week alongside the Ukrainian one, said troops were making the decisions about whether to stay or go themselves. “We’ve got apartments, we’ve got housing here, children that go to school,” he said.
Colonel Mamchur said he had decided to remain in Crimea. “I had a choice between duty and family,” he said, “and I’ve chosen family.”
For some, that choice was not yet apparent.
At the Nakhimov Naval Academy in Sevastopol, cadets were simply told last week that they now attend a Russian school.
But the transfer ceremony did not go as the Russians hoped. Some cadets defiantly sang the Ukrainian national anthem, prompting the bandmaster to order his musicians to play the Russian anthem to drown them out.