At the height of their combat deployment, the British troops numbered close to 10,000, deployed at 137 bases. Now the tally is fewer than 5,000 soldiers who plan to complete their withdrawal by the end of 2014. Those are the easy statistics. The hard one is this: 448 British soldiers have perished in a war that has not answered Britons’ questions about why they had to die.
Ostensibly, after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, when Osama bin Laden enjoyed sanctuary in the Taliban-ruled Afghanistan, the years of combat were supposed to deny a haven to Qaeda terrorists hatching plots against the West. But the fighting did not pre-empt the resurgence of the Taliban or spare British citizens the violence of terrorism linked to Pakistan on their own soil.
In less than 13 years, militants have relocated across the globe from North Africa to Somalia to Yemen. Now it is the war in Syria that has replaced far-flung training camps in Afghanistan or Pakistan as the newest academy of jihad.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
When British and American combat troops leave Afghanistan, the overwhelming question is whether the post-invasion template has already been devised in Iraq, where unreconciled sectarian passions have erupted in the vacuum of Western withdrawal, and where the behavior of British troops has come under harsh criticism.
Writ small, another footnote in the annals of Britain’s usually ill-fated campaigns in Afghanistan from the 19th century onward has been unfolding this week in the attempts of a retired officer to promote a memoir of his time there, raising the question of how much the war effort was built on deceit and dissimulation about the adequacy of soldiers’ equipment.
Maj. Richard Streatfeild, 41, was a commander in the hotly contested Sangin region in 2009 and 2010 who became what newspapers called a “poster boy” for the British Army through his blogs about the valor and sacrifice of soldiers on one of the BBC’s most prestigious radio news programs.
In those broadcasts, known as The Sangin Diaries, he acknowledged this week, he played down concerns about poor equipment and training, a lack of radios and a shortage of armored vehicles to protect soldiers from hostile fire and explosives in what he called “the most dangerous place in the world.”
The truth, it is often said, is war’s first casualty.
Major Streatfeild said his priority was operational security and the safety of his unit. But five soldiers under his command died anyhow.
One of them, Michael Pritchard, 22, was killed when a British sniper mistook him for an insurgent. Major Streatfeild said a broken radio prevented officers from telling the sniper to hold his fire.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
But “the obvious thing that always stood out,” said Helen Perry, the fallen soldier’s mother, “was this should never have happened.”