To the Editor:
Re “Putin Reclaims Crimea for Russia and Bitterly Denounces the West” (front page, March 19):
President Vladimir V. Putin justifies the annexation of Crimea by saying that the strategic peninsula has historically been a part of Russia. There is more than a little truth to that.
Still, the unprovoked introduction of Russian troops into Crimea, coupled with a hastily organized, dubious Crimean independence vote, is deeply unsettling to the international order. And Russia still retains undue leverage in the region through its manipulation of natural gas supplies and pricing.
Facts on the ground in Crimea are most likely irreversible. The United States and the European Union should insist that for Russia to mend relations, Crimea must be purchased from Ukraine in the form of debt forgiveness, transfer of capital and the implementation of long-term natural gas supply contracts. This will help the fledgling Ukrainian government in Kiev, which has asked for $35 billion in aid to avoid default.
These tangible benefits should be negotiated under the auspices of the United Nations in an effort to turn these geopolitical lemons into lemonade.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
STEVE PORTNOY
Austin, Tex., March 19, 2014
To the Editor:
Re “The Unlikely Road to War,” by Roger Cohen (column, March 18):
It has been a hundred years since the beginning of World War I, and we live in a far more stable and secure world than our predecessors in 1914.
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
While it might be alarmist to suggest that tensions between nations, specifically Russia and the West, could lead to nuclear conflict, particularly in light of global interconnectedness, one should pause to think about the fragility of peace.