After the meeting, the government began asking the oligarchs to take the positions in the regional governments.
“It was a plan for stabilization,” an aide to one of the leaders, who was not authorized to discuss it publicly, said of the decision.
The ultra-wealthy industrialists wield such power in Ukraine that they form what amounts to a shadow government, with empires of steel and coal, telecoms and media, and armies of workers. Persuading some to serve as governors in the east was a small victory for the new government in Kiev.
“The government is doing what it can to avoid provoking any internal divisions,” Steven Pifer, a former American ambassador to Ukraine who is now at the Brookings Institution, said in a telephone interview. “They need people who have credibility in eastern Ukraine. The risk is this will be seen as business as usual by putting wealthy people in government. That has been part of the problem for the past 22 years.”
The push on the Crimean peninsula for decentralization that quickly found support from Russia’s military could easily spread to eastern Ukraine, a region deeply dependent on Russian trade and energy, and where the nationalistic words and deeds of the new government alienated many.
In another conciliatory gesture, Mr. Turchynov on Sunday vetoed a divisive law passed last week that would have eliminated Russian as an official second language: about half of Ukraine’s population speaks Russian.
What had been the country’s largest political party, the Party of Regions, led by former President Viktor F. Yanukovych, had its base in the east, but now few representatives are in the government in Kiev. The challenge is to quickly restore the foundations of political authority in the east to build up the interim government’s credibility as an inclusive leadership, willing to recognize Ukraine’s diversity, and in time to slow the centrifugal forces of an emerging pro-Russian uprising in the east.
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
Yuri V. Lutsenko, an opposition leader who played a prominent role in the three-month protest movement that led to the toppling of Mr. Yanukovych, told the newspaper Ukrainska Pravda that the purpose of appointing the oligarchs to run the regional governments “is to stabilize the situation in regions using not only state resources, but also private resources for the integrity of Ukraine.”
RUSSIA Kiev UKRAINE Lviv Kharkiv UKRAINE Donetsk Sea of Azov CRIMEA CRIMEA RUSSIA Simferopol Airport Simferopol Perevalnoye Belbek Airport Sevastopol Black Sea Balaklava Yalta 50 Miles
Mr. Taruta, appointed to lead the Donetsk region, is the chairman of the board of ISD Corporation, a sprawling Ukrainian steel enterprise. Ukraine’s richest man, Rinat Akhmetov, issued a statement on Sunday through his company, System Capital Management, signaling that he would not enter politics. Mr. Akhmetov said that he supported Ukraine’s territorial unity and would focus on running his company to improve the economy. “Our objective is to ensure the safety of people and their families and secure stable operations of companies in the country,” the statement said.
Viktor Pinchuk, Ukraine’s second wealthiest man and the son-in-law of a former president, issued a statement signaling support for the appointments but noting he had not taken one. “In such times in Ukraine big business can play a role temporarily in government,” it said, “while in usual times Ukraine’s challenge is to separate business and politics.”
Mr. Taruta issued a statement saying that he decided to serve as governor out of a “desire to protect our country where there is no difference which language you speak or which religion you believe in.”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.
“Everybody has a right for a new, strong Ukraine,” he added.
Mr. Kolomoysky, a steel, airline and media tycoon, accepted the position of governor of the Dnipropetrovsk region, an area on the fracture line between east and west in Ukraine. His acceptance was first reported on Sunday by 1+1, a television station that Mr. Kolomoysky owns.
Ukrainian news media reported that Vadim Novinsky, the owner of Smart Holding Company, who Forbes magazine estimated last year had a net worth of $1.9 billion, is under consideration as Kiev’s representative to Crimea, though his duties would be unclear, since the peninsula is already solidly under Russian control.
Another figure reported to be under consideration for a governorship in the east is Aleksandr Yaroslavsky, a developer and banker. The interim government offered him the position of governor of the Kharkiv region, where pro-Russian protesters on Saturday overran a regional administration building.