Story highlights Boris Johnson appointed new UK Foreign Secretary
He has a history of insulting foreign leaders and peoples
(CNN) After just two weeks in the political wilderness, Boris Johnson is back.
The response to the decision by new UK Prime Minister Theresa May to appoint Johnson Foreign Secretary has been largely one of shock, even among the former London Mayor's supporters. Johnson actively campaign for the UK to leave the European Union -- May was a Remainer -- and backed her rival to be Conservative Party leader.
There was also the unlikeliness of making Johnson -- who has a history of insulting foreign leaders and overseas gaffes -- Britain's chief diplomat.
"Dear world ... sorry," read the headline of the UK's Daily Mirror in the wake of Johnson's appointment, while U.S. State Department spokesman Mark Toner seemed to smile with disbelief when he was given the news at a press conference (before hurriedly restoring his expression to a more diplomatic neutrality).
Others greeted the news with mockery and outrage, with many highlighting Johnson's embarrassing flubs at home and abroad -- like when he got stuck on a zip line or tackled a 10-year-old -- and his numerous insulting comments about foreigners.
Upside: Boris Johnson as UK Foreign Secretary is an absolute godsend for social media satire.

Downside: Most other things. — ian bremmer (@ianbremmer) July 13, 2016
From the archives: UK Foreign Minister Boris Johnson with some truly risible views on Africa. pic.twitter.com/GrWHGZqkhJ — ian bremmer (@ianbremmer) July 13, 2016
Boris Johnson is in charge of MI6.

Boris Johnson is James Bond's boss.

This is worse than Quantum of Solace. — Scott Townsend (@scottyt77) July 13, 2016
Ladies and gentlemen, our new Foreign Secretary.https://t.co/DLslNUbQst — Paul Beadle (@paulbeadle) July 13, 2016
May's plan with Boris Johnson seems to be "let's put this buffoon in a position of power so he'll discredit himself. What could go wrong?" — Jeet Heer (@HeerJeet) July 13, 2016
"The problem is not that we were once in charge [in Africa] but that we are not in charge any more." Boris Johnson, 2002 — Michael Rosen (@MichaelRosenYes) July 13, 2016
Say hello to Britain's new lead ambassador to the world, Mr. Boris Johnson pic.twitter.com/FUjyjhimyV — Historical Pics (@HistoricalPics) July 13, 2016
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson's first official meeting with President Obama will be interesting. Suggest it starts with the word "sorry" — Chuka Umunna (@ChukaUmunna) July 13, 2016
Boris Johnson as Foreign Secretary. So this is, in fact, the year we all die. — Warren Ellis (@warrenellis) July 13, 2016
Phew!
Just when Britain was starting to become a laughing stock around the world,
Boris Johnson is appointed foreign secretary. — Ricky Gervais (@rickygervais) July 13, 2016
Boris is currently being shown Theresa's SPECIAL BIG MAP, which gently introduces him to large world-shaped area outside of Westminster — Sue Perkins (@sueperkins) July 13, 2016
How can Boris Johnson be Foreign Secretary when he can't even maintain diplomatic relations with Liverpool? — Rosie Fletcher (@rosieatlarge) July 13, 2016
Good to see @BorisJohnson as the new UK foreign secretary. He's a good friend of Australia. pic.twitter.com/mMztmvDoOP — Tony Abbott (@TonyAbbottMHR) July 14, 2016
Read More