London (CNN) As dawn broke over the UK Friday, Britons woke to the tremors of a political earthquake the likes of which most had never felt before.
After one of the bitterest political campaigns in recent UK history, voters backed a British exit -- a "Brexit" -- from the European Union, turning their back on decades of peaceful cooperation with neighbors across the English Channel in favor of isolationism.
Respected political commentators and regular Joes were quick to flag up the revolutionary mood as the country faced up to a stunned "morning after" that left many on social media, over breakfast tables and around office water coolers asking "WTF?"
"This is as close to a revolution as we've experienced in my lifetime. And it's only just begun," tweeted Westminster correspondent turned presenter Nick Robinson.
This is as close to a revolution as we've experienced in my lifetime. And it's only just begun #EUref
Brace yourself for political and financial tumult like little we have ever witnessed. Expect Bank of England to step in
The referendum was the climax of months of angry posturing over its future inside or outside of the EU. Arguments became increasingly heated in the weeks leading up to the vote as the "Leave" and "Remain" teams traded barbs about immigration and racism, wealth and privilege.
News of the "Vote Leave" win was greeted with jubilation by those who have fought long and hard for a rethink of Britain's links to the current 28 member bloc, and who argued it was time to "take back control" from the bureaucrats in Brussels.
Addressing "Leave" supporters at a results party in London as UK broadcasters began to call the referendum results in their favor, UK Independence Party (UKIP) leader Nigel Farage said the country was marking its "Independence Day."
JUST WATCHED Nigel Farage: This will be a victory for real people Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Nigel Farage: This will be a victory for real people 02:25
"Ladies and gentlemen, dare to dream that the dawn is breaking on an independent United Kingdom," he said. "I hope this victory brings down this failed project ... Let's get rid of ... Brussels and all that has gone wrong. Let June 23 go down in history as our Independence Day."
But for those who had campaigned in favor of remaining in the EU, the referendum result -- which the "Leave" campaign won by a narrow -- but wider than predicted -- majority was a profound shock.
Green MP Caroline Lucas tweeted that the verdict was "devastating" and a "massive wake-up call to Westminster," urging all concerned to "find ways to heal our broken democracy."
For some there was genuine fear over what the final tally said about Britain in 2016, and about the country's apparent decision to close its doors to anyone it considers "outsiders."
Historian Simon Schama described the results as a "catastrophe," and warned of bleak times ahead if the UK does formally split from the EU.
JUST WATCHED Historian: Hatred of immigrants drives leave campaign Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Historian: Hatred of immigrants drives leave campaign 00:46
"It's a catastrophe ... for Europe," he told CNN. "We're on a very dangerous knife edge about the integrity and coherence of Europe.
"[We're] at one of those moments, my historian's nose tells me, [that] if this result stays and Britain does leave the union we're entering a very dark and exceptionally dangerous period in European and world history too."
For others, there was concern over what it is likely to mean for the country's future.
"I think people are going to wake up and think 'Oh my god, what's happening now?'" said Alastair Campbell, former communications adviser to Tony Blair. "There are so many unknowns."
The final results map highlights a telling split between London and the rest of England and Wales.
That gap was also apparent during the referendum campaign, with members of the "Leave" team accusing the capital's "elite" of being out of touch with what Nigel Farage called "real people ... ordinary people ... decent people."
Faced with an ever growing list of prominent personalities, captains of industry, world leaders and famous figures backing the "Remain" cause, Conservative MP Michael Gove, seen as the brains behind the "Vote Leave" campaign, told Sky News: " I think people in this country have had enough of experts ."
JUST WATCHED The UK votes to leave the EU in 90 seconds Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH The UK votes to leave the EU in 90 seconds 01:32
"London is a very distant place, a different country at times," Blackpool North MP Paul Maynard told CNN before the referendum, warning that voters' feelings of disempowerment was likely to impact on the result. "If supposedly 'important' people in London are telling them to do something, it may make them do the opposite."
The seismic difference of opinion between voters in England and Wales and those in Scotland and Northern Ireland has led to concerns that the United Kingdom may not be "united" for very much longer.
"If this result holds, it's the end of Britain, it's as simple as that," said Simon Schama.
Scotland wants to stay
Scotland voted overwhelmingly in favor of staying in the EU, leading to calls for a second referendum on Scottish independence to allow Scots to "remain" even if the rest of the nation leaves.
"Scotland is voting overwhelming to stay; if Scotland cannot be coerced into leaving the EU against its will, you cannot in all decency deny them a second referendum," Schama said.
JUST WATCHED British PM: Economy is fundamentally strong Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH British PM: Economy is fundamentally strong 03:57
"If all the leavers are about self-government, and taking back control, why shouldn't Scotland take back control?"
In Northern Ireland, which also voted to "remain" in the EU, the Brexit vote may also have a lasting impact, with some suggesting it may lead to Irish unification.
Before the referendum, Sinn Fein's Martin McGuinness, deputy first minister of Northern Ireland, told the Guardian newspaper there was a "democratic imperative" to allow voters in the region to vote on a united Ireland.
Throughout the campaign, the "Stronger In" team frequently played up the fact that walking out on the EU meant taking a step into the dark.London (CNN) Shortly after 5 a.m. in the northwest London suburb of Harlesden, Toni Carlton rolled over in bed, picked up her cell phone and checked its news feed.
And nearly burst into tears.
"It felt like the world was ending right there," said the 41-year-old childminder. "It sounds dramatic, but I just felt like burying my head in the pillow and screaming."
She wasn't alone.
Across the UK, many people were waking up Friday to what they've spent the past few months dreading -- a leap into the unknown.
The country voted to end its decades-long membership in the European Union, plunging headlong into political, economic and social uncertainty.
But while anger was erupting in bedrooms and, in London at least, on the streets, there were also scenes of joy.
In a country bitterly divided, the many millions who voted for independence from what they considered an outmoded and overbearing bureaucracy were punching the air in triumph and singing in jubilation.
Or, at the very least, affording themselves a smile.
Passionate campaigning
"I'm ecstatic," said Darren Grimes, a 22-year-old from the coastal city of Brighton who had campaigned for Britain's exit -- or Brexit -- from Europe. "You can't even begin to imagine how I feel."
That emotions were running so strongly in the wake of the national 52% to 48% Brexit victory shouldn't come as a surprise.
Passionate campaigning for the vote on both sides has seen tempers boil over with rivals accusing each other of peddling lies, hatred and distrust in pursuit of political gain.
Cities, towns, households and even families have been divided by claim and counterclaim over how EU membership affects thorny issues such as immigration and healthcare.
And as the results rolled in through the small hours of Friday morning, those divisions were also exposed along geological fault lines as areas such as London and Scotland voted for the Europe that much of the rest of the country wanted to leave behind.
'Sad and frightened'
In the capital, a city built on immigration, the disappointment was palpable. Voices on the streets talked of "craziness," "shock," and even "embarrassment" at the outcome.
"I'm terrified for the future," said Carrie Dunn, 36. "I truly and honestly believe that unity and friendship are the way forward for all of us, and fear this choice will plunge us into isolationism.
"I believe this is probably the end of the United Kingdom as we know it. I'm sad and frightened."
Despair over the vote turned into angry scenes at one point in the capital as jeering crowds of protesters gathered outside the home of pro-Brexit politician Boris Johnson, swarming his car as he left to deliver a speech about his side's victory.
Beyond the capital, there were other displays of anguish, particularly in places that may struggle if migrant EU workers are required to leave.
The St. Giles Cafe in the university city of Oxford, where 70% voted in favor of remaining in the EU, was photographed Friday morning with messages from its owners daubed on the window.
"No EU, no cafe," they read. "Closed in protest of EU vote."
"My sense is that most folks in Oxford are surprised this morning," Kathleen Lawton-Trask, an American who says she's lived in the city for almost five years, wrote on Instagram.
Local cafe shut in protest of #Brexit #oxford #noEUnoCafe A photo posted by knitlikeyoumeanit (@knitlikeyoumeanit) on Jun 24, 2016 at 6:03am PDT
'Whirlwind of emotions'
Expats from EU countries living in the UK spoke of their fears for the future.
"When I heard the news this morning, I was overwhelmed by a whirlwind of emotions," said Mia Hasenson-Gross, a Finnish woman who has lived in London for more than 12 years.
"I was in disbelief, I thought this can't be true, there must be a mistake and urged my husband to check again.
"When he confirmed it was true, the next feeling to kick in was confusion -- so what does that mean for me? An EU national who has lived here for the last 12.5 years, built a home and raised a family, established myself as a member of my community."
In the northern city of York, Abbey Urbanski, an English woman married to a Polish citizen, said the result had left her "pretty numb all morning and at a loss as to what the future hold for our little family unit."
Others described being swept up with negative emotion despite having voted in favor of Brexit.
'Reality sinks in'
Mandy Suthi, a London student, said she wanted to vote again to reverse her earlier decision.
"This morning the reality was actually sinking in," she told CNN affiliate ITN. "My family, this morning, even though the majority of us voted to leave, we actually regret it today."
Despite winning more than half of votes, public signs of jubilation for the Brexit camp were largely muted, although the delight was keenly felt by many.
In Darlington, northeast England, where 71% voted to leave the EU, the early morning verdict was greeted politely by anti-Europe campaigners.
"The leave campaigners were smiling and shaking hands in the run up to the announcement," said Charlotte Bowe, a reporter with the local Northern Echo newspaper who was covering the count. "They were thrilled and very happy."
'Just another day'
"I spoke to one gentleman who had been campaigning for 20 years, who was very, very pleased. The remain supporters left the area pretty quickly."
But on the streets of Darlington on Friday it was "just another day," she said.
Brian Rush, a local leader of the anti-EU UKIP party in the eastern English market town of Boston -- where 75.5% voted to leave -- also described low-key celebrations.
"I'm a little bit tired, but we're so overwhelmed at the support," he said. "There's certainly lots of smiling faces here now."
But in one corner of the country, later on Friday, there will at least be singing.
"How am I celebrating?" said Brexit campaigner Grimes. "This evening, we're going to karaoke."Frida Ghitis is a world affairs columnist for The Miami Herald and World Politics Review, and a former CNN producer and correspondent. Follow her @FridaGhitis . The opinions expressed in this commentary are hers.
Amsterdam, Netherlands (CNN) Moments after the startling results of Britain's vote to leave the European Union emerged, anti-immigrant crusaders in other parts of Europe gave notice they, too, would try to get their countries to leave.
Here in the Netherlands, populist politician Geert Wilders unleashed a Twitter storm of jubilation, declaring, "And the Netherlands will be next!" His French counterpart, Marine Le Pen, said she and her far-right National Front would try to organize a "Frexit," a referendum to take France out of the EU.
The calls for Frexit or for a "Nexit," as the nascent campaign to pull out the Netherlands is called, are a clear sign that the EU -- one of the mainstays of global stability after World War II -- may start to unravel altogether.
While much of the initial focus of the "Brexit" vote has turned to financial markets, which opened in a state of panic Friday, they are only the first and most tangible sign of the powerful impact of the vote.
A more subtle and important consequence of a weakened, and perhaps ultimately defunct EU, is what it could do to democracy, human rights and the rule of law beyond its own borders.
For decades, a dazzling achievement of the EU has been its ability to attract other counties to its model. Former Communist bloc nations have aspired to become part of Europe. The EU gave them a road map. It is a road map that, if followed by all countries, would increase peace, stability and well-being across the globe.
To join, EU hopefuls must satisfy the so-called Copenhagen criteria. The first, the one that must be met before a country is officially considered a candidate, is "(s)tability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human rights and respect for the protection of minorities."
With that clause, the EU exerted an outsize positive influence across the entire European continent. Impoverished nations dreaming of joining the union found it necessary to improve the way they dispensed justice; they worked to fight against prejudice; they at least tried to improve their treatment of religious, ethnic and even gender-identity minorities.
JUST WATCHED Bank stocks crushed on Brexit vote Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Bank stocks crushed on Brexit vote 01:09
While the citizens of comparatively rich Western European countries have been pondering whether or not to stay in the EU, countries to the East have been dreaming of joining, and working to meet the requirements. A couple of months ago, during a trip to Albania, I was startled to discover the country has a full ministry, the Ministry of European Integration, dedicated to the task of fulfilling Europe's membership requirements.
Obviously, would-be EU members are enticed more than anything by the economic benefits of membership, but the EU beckons as something more than a prosperity club. It is a club of freedom, of good governance, of opportunity and respect for individuals.
Is it flawed? No doubt. There are reasons why so many want to leave. A recent poll found 47% of people in key European countries have unfavorable views of the EU. Concerns about having to obey Brussels' bureaucratic rules have simmered for years, but they heated up after the Greek bailout and boiled over with the current refugee crisis.
The champions of European integration seem to have rejected the notion that citizens of individual countries value their national identity and prize their ability to chart their own course. At the very least, EU leaders need to trim the union's sails, reduce their ambitions and backtrack; move closer to the original idea of creating an economic union, while holding fast to requirements that allow only true democracies to join.
JUST WATCHED Tony Blair on how Brexit happened and U.S. relations Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Tony Blair on how Brexit happened and U.S. relations 01:39
What happened in Britain and is now inspiring anti-Europe activists elsewhere would have been troubling at any time. But it is much more distressing -- and dangerous -- now.
It is no coincidence that the forces tearing apart the European Union are gaining strength even as we are seeing an alarming rise in nationalism, nativism and autocracy. This is occurring in an environment that has brought us smooth-talking demagogues exploiting people's fears and prejudices . It is precisely the moment when the values that the EU promotes are most needed, but it is also, not surprisingly, when they are most sharply under attack.
The British decision weakens Western unity. It is a moment of triumph for autocratic leaders such as Russian President Vladimir Putin, who is watching his foes -- the democratic countries that imposed sanctions against Russia after he attacked Ukraine -- fight amongst themselves. And let's remember, Putin went after Ukraine for one specific reason: to keep it from drawing closer to the EU.
If the EU unravels, it will be a slow, dispiriting process. We should hope for good leadership, particularly in the United States, to save the Western alliance and its economic, political and moral appeal.
JUST WATCHED On historic day, Trump hard-sells new golf course Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH On historic day, Trump hard-sells new golf course 01:38
Will the Netherlands leave? While economic and political leaders here say it would be a mistake and call the Brexit vote "a major blow, an earthquake," a Dutch exit from Europe is quite conceivable.
Much like other right-wing politicians, Wilders was once a fringe figure. But that has changed. His Party for Freedom leads in the polls. Elections are scheduled for March, and after Thursday's vote in Britain, "Nexit" becomes a top issue for the campaign.
After the vote results. European Council President Donald Tusk mused , "I always remember what my father used to tell me: What doesn't kill you makes you stronger." The Brexit vote may well end up killing the EU.
If European leaders display uncanny wisdom, maybe, just maybe, it will ultimately make the EU stronger. But at the risk of disagreeing with Tusk's father, the vote is more likely to weaken the European Union, strengthen its foes and undermine the quality of democracy across the European continent.For “Leave” voters, the calculus is almost precisely the opposite. In other words, this isn’t just a split over what the effects of Brexit will be. Rather, the divide is over what is important — and the two sides of the debate prioritize totally different things.
A generational split is about more than age
Age Gap Younger voters want to stay in the European Union; older voters want to leave. Voters age 18 to 34 Voters age 35 to 54 Voters 55 and older Remain Leave 52 31 Remain Leave 40 38 Remain Leave 27 29 Voters age 18 to 34 Voters age 35 to 54 Voters 55 and older Remain Leave 52% 31% Remain Leave 40% 38% Remain Leave 27% 29%
This second chart, showing the age split between “Leave” and “Remain” backers, helps explain why the two sides have such starkly different priorities.
The split isn’t just about divergent generational attitudes; different age groups have different stakes in the economy.
Older voters are more likely to be retired and on a pension or other fixed income. That could mean they feel insulated from any short-term economic downturns caused by a Brexit — and that they don’t expect to share in future economic gains from staying. Younger voters have more to gain and lose from the economy’s performance — and from being able to freely work across Europe.
Photo
The age gap may also be connected to differing views of immigration, which in turn may be linked to geography. Anti-immigrant sentiment is often highest in towns with few immigrants — places where the problem isn’t foreigners competing with natives for jobs, but the absence of economic opportunities over all.
Opposition to immigration has become an indirect way to express anxiety over the changes globalization has brought to Britain, said Alexandra Cirone, a fellow at the London School of Economics.
“Framing this globalization problem as immigration,” she said, “can tug on the heartstrings of potential voters, regardless of the actual facts.”
Advertisement Continue reading the main story
In recent decades, Britain’s economy has shifted away from industry and manufacturing and toward services. That means many older Britons who once worked in factories or mines have seen their former employers shuttered and their communities become poorer, even as the country as a whole has become wealthier. They have also seen their towns wither as their children move to cities to find jobs.
To people outside those communities, Britain today is a wealthy country, with low unemployment and vibrant cities, a place where young people have plentiful and exciting opportunities. But in the areas hit hardest by economic change, all that success feels like a shift away from a comfortable past and toward a frightening future.
For voters who feel left behind by globalization and the rapid social changes that have come with it, a vote to leave the European Union can feel like a vote to restore Britain to its former greatness.
“Britain was a world power. They had an empire,” said Terrence Peterson, a fellow at Stanford University’s Center for International Security and Cooperation. A vote to leave the bloc, therefore, can feel like vote to return to Britain as it once was.
Financial markets have been shakenThe British people have voted to leave the European Union after a historic referendum in which they rejected the advice of the main Westminster party leaders and instead took a plunge into the political unknown.
The decision in favour of Brexit, following a bitterly close electoral race, represents the biggest shock to the political establishment in Britain and across Europe for decades, and will threaten the leaderships of both the prime minister, David Cameron, and the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn.
EU referendum results: Nigel Farage declares 'independence day' – live Read more
The value of the pound swung wildly on currency markets as initial confidence among investors expecting a remain vote was dented by some of the early referendum results, triggering falls of close to 10% and its biggest one-day fall ever. Jeremy Cook, chief economist and head of currency strategy at WorldFirst, said: “Sterling has collapsed … It can go a lot further as well.”
By 4am, a series of key results signposted a likely leave victory. After a lower-than-expected margin of victory for the remain campaign in Newcastle, where it won the backing of 54% of voters, there was a jolt after midnight when leave captured Sunderland with 61.3% of the vote in a city that has traditionally been a Labour stronghold.

Cameron is to address the nation from Downing Street at 8.15am, and leading leave campaigner Boris Johnson is likely to make a statement shortly afterwards.
Speaking at a party in Westminster, the Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, declared Friday the UK’s “independence day”, and said the referendum result was a “victory for real people, a victory for ordinary people, a victory for decent people”.
Farage called for Cameron to be replaced immediately. “We have to have a Brexit prime minister,” he said. He also demanded a national public holiday on 23 June to mark the Brexit vote.
Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, said the British people had made their decision and called for article 50 – the clause that allows the UK to leave the European Union – to be invoked straight away. He told the BBC: “Many communities are fed up with cuts and economic dislocation and feel very angry about the way they have been betrayed and marginalised. My point was we had to have an alternative to austerity and greater resources going into areas where there have been huge changes.”
Hilary Benn, the shadow foreign secretary, had already said Cameron would have to resign if the UK voted for Brexit. “If there were to be a vote to leave, then as far as the prime minister is concerned I don’t see how he is going to remain in his job for very long at all,” he said.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Leave supporters celebrate the result in Sunderland after polling stations closed. Photograph: Toby Melville/Reuters
On Thursday evening, Cameron was backed by 84 pro-Brexit MPs to remain as prime minister whatever the result, but about 50 did not sign the letter, meaning there could be enough to trigger a vote of no confidence.

In England, every region outside of London voted to leave. The highest vote for leave was in the West Midlands with 59.11% opting for Brexit. In London, 59.94% voted to remain.
Cameron had said he wanted to stay on to trigger article 50 and start negotiations to take the UK out of the EU in the event of a vote to leave but there is likely to be considerable pressure for him to quit given the public’s defiance of his forceful calls for the UK to remain in the EU.
There was continued joy at leave parties during the night as swing areas across England delivered wins, often of a much larger magnitude than forecast.

The first declarations in some larger areas of London saw fleeting scraps of good news for remain but it was short-lived as traditional election marginals backed leave. Nuneaton, a central English town seen as a bellwether of middle England delivered a 66% vote for leave.
In Wales, too, leave voters were dominant, after at least 18 of the 22 Welsh authorities had declared. Only three – the Vale of Glamorgan in the south, Monmouthshire in the south-east and Ceredigion in west Wales – voted to remain.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest David Cameron was due to address the nation just after 6am. Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters
As expected, remain won in Scotland, although margins of victory and turnouts fell short of what was needed to stop the leave juggernaut in the southern parts of Britain.
The Labour leadership is preparing to argue that Corbyn was much closer to the centre of gravity of public opinion than Cameron. However, one Labour MP said there would be calls for Corbyn to resign later on Friday as “even his supporters realise he is not up to it”.
John Mills, a major Labour donor who has been campaigning for leave, said his party’s mistake was to link itself so closely to the in campaign, instead of understanding the concerns of its traditional voters.
Recriminations are already flying within the party, with some blaming Corbyn for failing to campaign robustly enough, while others have pointed the finger at Nicola Sturgeon, the SNP leader, saying that she spent too much time attacking the remain camp and that her “lacklustre” efforts resulted in a low turnout in Scotland.

A source within the SNP hit back at what she called a “poor attempt by Labour to deflect from its own campaign”. She said her party was securing remain wins across the country, while Labour had lost in its heartlands.
Sturgeon was expected to speak on Friday morning, touching on the possibility of a second Scottish referendum after her country voted to remain in the EU, in contrast to England. Much of London voted convincingly to remain.
The vista of a sharply divided country with particular fault lines opening up between London and other English communities was repeatedly raised by Labour MPs reacting to the results.

EU referendum results – live tracker Read more
The former Labour leader Ed Miliband said: “It’s a nation divided and the PM will have a big responsibility – particularly if it’s a remain win – to show he understands what people are saying on the leave side of the argument. Labour faces that responsibility too.
“As far as Labour voters are concerned, there are two issues. There is obviously immigration, but beneath that there is a whole set of issues about people’s lives and the fact that they don’t feel politics is listening to them.”
Pat McFadden, the party’s MP for Wolverhampton South East and a former shadow Europe minister, said: “It shows a country just split down the middle. Certainly for people voting to come out, immigration is very high on their list of concerns but there is also something else here too, a real sense of pessimism among people and their place in the UK.”Donald Trump has hailed Britain’s decision to leave the EU as a “great victory”, attributing the result to immigration and drawing parallels with opposition to what he described as the “global elite” in the US and elsewhere around the world.
The presumptive Republican nominee for president said he had not only backed Brexit but successfully predicted the result, unlike Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton and even David Cameron.
Anger in response to high immigration was a worldwide phenomenon, he said, insisting this would not be the last upset as he claimed links between a Brexit vote and his candidacy for the White House.
Speaking on the first day of his two day-visit to Scotland, Trump said: “I think really people see a big parallel. A lot of people are talking about that. Not only the United States but other countries. People want to take their country back. They want to have independence in a sense.
“You see it all over Europe and many other cases where they want to take their borders back. They want to take their monetary [sic] back. They want to take a lot of things back. They want to have a country again. I think you are going to have this more and more. I really believe that. And it is happening in the United States.”
Trump, on his first trip overseas since he embarked on his White House bid, faced criticism in the US for making what was essentially a business trip at a time when his campaign has been faltering, falling behind Clinton in the polls and in fundraising.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Donald Trump arrives to the sound of bagpipes. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian
But his timing proved impeccable, arriving just hours after the UK confronted its biggest political crisis for decades, guaranteeing him extensive television coverage in the US.
He turned the vote into political capital, issuing a statement later in the day saying the UK had exercised the “sacred right” of free people to independence and reassert control over their own politics, borders and economy. He promised a Trump administration would deepen its bonds with the UK.

In November, he added, it would be the turn of the US, a chance to redeclare their independence. “They will have the chance to reject today’s rule by the global elite and embrace real change that delivers a government of, by and for the people,” Trump said.

He flew overnight from New York to Glasgow Prestwick airport where he transferred to one of the three Trump helicopters – two permanently based in the US and one in the UK – for the short trip to the Trump Turnberry golf resort, stepping on to the lawn to the sound of bagpipes.
He held the press conference on a promontory overlooking the sea and a lighthouse, the resort’s ninth hole. The start was delayed by a comedian, Lee Nelson, who appeared to be one of the staff, trying to hand out “Nazi” golf balls with swastikas on them.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest The comedian Lee Nelson with the ‘Nazi’ golf balls at the opening of Donald Trump’s Ayrshire hotel and golf course, Trump Turnberry. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian
Trump, in a hat emblazoned with “Make America Great Again” and accompanied by his wife and family, devoted about 15 minutes to extolling the excellence of his golf course, saying that even people who hated him would acknowledge this.
It is unusual for a US presidential candidate to use an overseas trip to make a naked pitch for business but Trump does not see it like that. It was the ninth such visit to one of his hotels or resorts since the campaign began. In an odd twist, he said countries could learn lessons from running golf clubs.
US reporters accompanying Trump said his press conference, in which he repeatedly turned to the issue of immigration, was more restrained than his previous campaign performances.
Asked about Cameron, he expressed sympathy for him, even though there had been what he described as rough patches, presumably a reference to the former prime minister’s criticism of the presumptive Republican candidate. Asked about Boris Johnson, he declined to comment.
Trump said his relationship with the UK was a “love-fest”. I asked Trump why Cameron was not prepared to meet him. He replied: “David Cameron would have met me. David Cameron was negotiating to meet me. But I do not think he wants to meet anyone right now.”
Facebook Twitter Pinterest Trump claimed his relationship with the UK was a ‘love-fest’. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian
I said no senior UK or Scottish politician wanted to meet him, citing Nicola Sturgeon and Alex Salmond, and suggested it was because he was toxic. Taking offence at the question, he described me as “a nasty, nasty guy”.
The only politicians present for the reopening were from South Ayrshire council, led by the provost, Helen Moonie.
The protests were held well away from the press conference, at a car park on the grounds. Trump said the predictions had been that thousands would turn up – in fact the predictions had been a couple of hundred – but and his staff estimated the turnout at only 43.Vote Leave’s poster boy should have been crowing, so why was his post-referendum press conference so subdued?
“If we are victorious in one more battle … we shall be utterly ruined.”
Like the good intellectual that he’s vigorously pretended not to be of late, Boris Johnson will probably know that line. It’s from the Greek historian Plutarch’s account of the battle that gave us the phrase “pyrrhic victory”, the kind of victory won at such cost that you almost wish you’d lost.
In theory, Johnson woke up on Friday morning having won the war. After David Cameron’s announcement that he would step down come October, Johnson is now the heir presumptive – albeit at this stage very presumptive – to the Tory leadership, perhaps only four months away from running the country.
He has everything he ever wanted. It’s just that somehow, as he fought his way through booing crowds on his Islington doorstep before holding an uncharacteristically subdued press conference on Friday morning, it didn’t really look that way.
One group of Tory remainers watching the speech on TV jeered out loud when a rather pale Johnson said leaving Europe needn’t mean pulling up the drawbridge; that this epic victory for Nigel Farage could somehow “take the wind out of the sails” of anyone playing politics with immigration. Too late for all that now, one said.
Over to you, says puffy-eyed Cameron as the Brexit vultures circle Read more
The scariest possibility, however, is that he actually meant it. That like most of Westminster, Johnson always imagined we’d grudgingly vote to stay in the end. That he too missed the anger bubbling beneath the surface, and is now as shocked as anyone else by what has happened.
“People talk about reluctant remainers, but I think there have been a lot of reluctant Brexiters around, people who voted leave thinking it wouldn’t happen but they’d be able to vent and to tell all their friends at dinner parties they’d done it,” said one Tory minister.
“He thought what all those reluctant Brexiters thought: it would be a vote for remain, he would be seen as having stood up for a principle.” After which leave’s newest martyr could simply have bided his time for a year or so before being triumphantly installed in Downing Street.
It’s perfectly possible, of course, that the Tories on both sides who suspect Johnson was never an outer in his bones are plain wrong, that the anonymous Labour MP who hotly accused him on Friday of jeopardising thousands of ordinary people’s jobs just to secure one for himself was doing him a terrible injustice.
Perhaps Johnson really did have a last-minute epiphany, declaring for leave in the sober realisation that this was always how it might end – Scotland demanding independence, Northern Ireland’s fragile political settlement at risk, Marine Le Pen jubilant, the Bank of England stumping up £250bn to stabilise the market. Perhaps he’s still convinced all will be fine eventually.
And let’s hope to God he’s right. Any remainer who doesn’t pray to be proved wrong about Brexit is callous, wishing disaster on people who are unable to afford it. But right now, what scorched earth Johnson stands to inherit – a nation febrile and divided, teetering on the brink of economic and constitutional crisis. It’s all over for David Cameron now. But it feels, too, like the end of a broader modernising movement to which both he and Johnson belonged.
Boris Johnson says 'no need for haste' to start EU exit negotiations Read more
The deeper fear among Tory remainers now isn’t just of a recession. It’s about the rise of something new in British politics, unleashed when politicians with scant respect for truth meet desperate voters; and for the backlash to come, when it sinks in that Brexit hasn’t ended immigration overnight or magically given depressed communities their futures back. Already, one wonders what those who voted desperately for change make of being told there’s no rush to invoke article 50.
No wonder Tory leavers wanted Cameron to stay for a bit while they scratched together a plan for dismounting safely from the tiger they’ve been riding. But control is what the Brexiters said they wanted. Now they’ve got it, and they’re about to find out how it feels.
It’s not over yet, of course. There are plenty of Tory MPs grimly determined to make them pay for whatever dark furies they have helped unleash; to lie down in front of the Boris bulldozer.
The obvious name flying around the “anyone but Boris for leader” camp on Friday morning was that of Theresa May. Some of those who backed George Osborne before the chancellor knowingly burned what remained of his ambitions by publishing that fantasy Brexit punishment budget will now back her, as will some Tory women worried that female voters distrust the philandering Johnson.
The women’s minister Nicky Morgan is also testing the water, but May probably has a headstart. The home secretary’s mysterious absence from the airwaves during the referendum campaign disguised a fair bit of local-level campaigning for remain, reaching activists likely to support her.
Boris Johnson favourite to replace David Cameron as PM after Brexit Read more
There is also the glimmer of an alternative emerging in Stephen Crabb, the work and pensions secretary endorsed by his good friend the Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson, who leads a small but interesting group of working class Tories keen to tackle the economic insecurity exposed by the Brexit vote.
But he’s a relatively unknown quantity even inside Westminster, let alone outside. The blunt truth is that nobody else in Conservative politics gets begged for selfies as Johnson did on every walkabout; none has his charisma or his reach. If his name is on a shortlist of two put forward to Tory members, few doubt he would be the runaway winner.
And if MPs conspire to keep him off that list during the preliminary stages of the contest? Well, imagine the consequences for those who have already outraged constituents by voting remain. Imagine the rage, the mass defections to Ukip, were Johnson to be seen to be blocked by yet another elite afraid of ordinary people getting it wrong.
So don’t imagine his colleagues haven’t noticed Johnson’s casualness with the facts during this campaign, or the unsavoury company he sometimes kept. Don’t think they don’t resent an old Etonian journalist on £250,000 a year playing the anti-establishment hero, or hope for something else to turn up. But don’t imagine either that some aren’t wearily wondering if this couldn’t be made to work.
Johnson is far from a buffoon. He’s an agile thinker, gifted communicator and natural opportunist who made a reasonable fist of governing London after recruiting some reliable deputies (enter Michael Gove). He’s smart enough to have learned from the recent Labour leadership campaign – in which managerially competent candidates were slaughtered for being on the wrong side of a visceral grassroots argument – that elites only survive in this febrile climate by pleasing the masses. Perhaps somehow it will all come together.
It’s just that on Friday morning Johnson didn’t look like a man with a plan that’s all working perfectly. He looked more like a king unable to take more such victories.• Decision to leave European Union could have far-reaching effects • End to freedom of movement could mean new work permits are required
So the votes are in. Britain’s status as a member of the European Union is now on borrowed time after the victory for the Brexit campaign. But what could that mean for professional sport in the United Kingdom?
Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union establishes the procedures for a member state to withdraw from the EU. Once that is invoked, Britain will have a two-year window in which to negotiate a new treaty to replace the terms of EU membership.
Brexit live: David Cameron to step down over EU referendum result Read more
According to Paul Shapiro, an associate at law firm Charles Russell Speechlys, that means the real effects could take some time to filter through, although he predicts a significant impact on various issues from the increased cost of transfers (West Ham’s €40m offer to buy Marseille’s Michy Batshuayi was worth £31m on Thursday but now already equates to more than £34m) to problems with work permits for players from EU countries.
“While the focus of the UK’s withdrawal from the European Union is likely to be on the impact on the City and migration, the impact on the sports world could be significant,” said Shapiro.
“However, we will not know how significant this will be until we have a clearer idea of the terms the UK negotiates for its continued relationship with the EU. If the agreement with the EU includes broad free movement obligations, such as those currently in place with EEA members, the current position regarding the movement of players between the continent and the UK will most likely continue.
“If, instead, an agreement is reached which includes restrictions on the movement of persons and services, the impact on the sports world would be more significant. Firstly, English players may not be able to move to the continent freely and EU nationals could be subject to entry restrictions when seeking to play in England, if post- Brexit they are treated in the same way as current non-EU nationals.”
Within a few hours of the result being confirmed, the Premier League played down concerns that the competition could be adversely affected by the developments.
“The Premier League is a hugely successful sporting competition that has strong domestic and global appeal. This will continue to be the case regardless of the referendum result,” read a statement.
“Given the uncertain nature of what the political and regulatory landscape might be following the ‘Leave’ vote, there is little point second-guessing the implications until there is greater clarity.
“Clearly, we will continue to work with government and other bodies whatever the outcome of any process.”
Yet it may not take for those implications to become clear. At the last count, there were more than 400 players plying their trade in the top two divisions in England and Scotland, with the vast majority unlikely to pass the stringent work permit requirements introduced by the Football Association in March 2015. Previously, in order to qualify to play in the UK, players needed to have played in at least 75% of their country’s senior international matches over the previous two years.
The new requirements state that non-EEA (European Economic Area) players will have to meet a minimum percentage of international matches played for their country over the previous 24-month period, as determined by that country’s Fifa world ranking – a model that is now likely to be extended to include players from EU countries as well. Freedom of movement, a principle central to the European project, has previously allowed players to earn a living in the UK without the need for a complicated work permit process.
“There’s been a lot of talk about work permits and what is going to happen to Anthony Martial and some of these promising academy players,” said Jake Cohen, a sports lawyer at Mills & Reeve.
“But the reality is it seems very unlikely that current contracts will be affected immediately because it could still be two years before the UK leaves the EU.”
Under the current rules, for example, Martial, Morgan Schneiderlin, Yohan Cabaye and N’Golo Kanté would no longer be eligible for a work permit having not featured in more than 45% of France’s matches since June 2014.
However, of more immediate concern for Premier League clubs is the fact that Brexit could also spell the end of the influx of teenage players from the European Union, who were previously considered as “homegrown” players who, irrespective of nationality or age, have been “registered with any club affiliated to the Football Association or the Football Association of Wales for a period, continuous or not, of three entire seasons or 36 months prior to his 21st birthday”. Current Premier League rules state that clubs must include eight such players out of a squad of 25, with Chelsea’s Cesc Fàbregas among those whose status would change.
“British football clubs may find themselves only able to sign foreign players over the age of 18 as, outside the EU/EEA, they would no longer be able to benefit from the exception under the current Fifa regulations given for transfers involving 16 and 17 year old footballers within the EU/EEA,” said Shapiro.
“If EU law ceases to apply in the UK, the organisers of sports competitions may be able to more effectively restrict the number of foreign players that feature in matchday squads as they could potentially include EU nationals and Kolpak players within any foreign player quota. Some governing bodies may see this as advantageous in that it would allow them to discriminate in favour of the development of English-qualified players to the potential advantage of the national team whereas it could be damaging to leagues/clubs who would be less competitive in their ability to attract the best players from across the continent.”
Cohen added: “When Paul Pogba came over to Manchester United from Le Havre that was only made possible because of the EU/EEA exception. There’s always been tension between the FA and the Premier League about the number of England-qualified players in the national team over that issue so it will be interesting to see how this effects that. Fifa are not going to negotiate a UK-specific rule as a result of the decision to leave the European Union.
Leave wins, Cameron goes: so what now for the Conservatives? Read more
“There are more than 70 kids currently playing for Premier League Under-18 teams. Some of these guys will end up being top players, and the loss of the Article 19 exemption would put Premier League clubs at a significant disadvantage over their European counterparts. Investing heavily in youth is football’s ultimate low-risk, high-reward talent acquisition strategy, and having to wait an extra two years to sign these players would be a blow to a talent pipeline that has been absolutely fundamental to Premier League clubs.
“Then there are some players whose contracts are negotiated in euros – they certainly look a little better today.”
Last season, less than a third of players in the Premier League were qualified to play for England and James Cross, a football and cricket agent for HIX Management Group and Mondial Sports Management, believes one benefit of Brexit could be an increase in the pool of talent available for British national teams.
“The short term effect could be that some of the younger British players who currently find their pathway to the first team is blocked by foreign players get more opportunities,” he said.
“But that could also mean that the price of British players becomes vastly inflated as clubs try to meet the requirements of having enough homegrown representation in their squads. Raheem Sterling cost Manchester City a British record £49m despite only having played two seasons in the Premier League and that premium is likely to increase.”
But it is not just the football industry that could feel the pinch. The Kolpak agreement of 2003 opened a can of worms for the England and Wales Cricket Board. From a situation where there was a sensible restriction on overseas players, county cricket became flooded with largely cheap cricketers from South Africa in particular, but also Zimbabwe and a number of Caribbean islands, all part of the African,Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) group of states. That group signed the Conotou Agreement with EU in 2000. By 2008 there were 60 Kolpak players registered to play county cricket.
Since then ECB has tried hard to find measures to reduce the influx. They were helped by a Conotou clarification, that said the agreement should apply to the movement of trade and services rather than labour. There was an attempt effectively to fine the counties by charging them for fielding non-England-qualified players. Finally, the Home Office brought in a ruling stating that any Kolpak player had to have a valid work visa for a four year period to qualify as an EU citizen.
As with other sports, Brexit will mean that Kolpak ruling no longer applies to cricket and the flow of players will have to stop. There is certain to be a moratorium however. The impact is unlikely to be immediate.
Meanwhile, rugby authorities in the UK have confirmed they will wait until the terms of Britain’s exit from the European Union are agreed before looking at the regulations governing overseas players.
Currently, the ‘foreign player’ rule does not apply to those from other EU countries or nations like South Africa, Fiji, Samoa and Tonga, who have an association agreement with the EU that allows their citizens the same freedom of work and movement as those who are from the member states. The current rule in the Premiership is that a club may have no more than two foreign players in a match day 23: if the EU exit negotiations mean that the current freedom of movement lapses, European and Kolpak players will be included in that tally and will only be granted a work permit if they have played in a Test match in the previous 15 months.
One option would be to increase the quota of foreign players to five or six, but clubs would not be able to sign up emerging players from outside the British Isles while there would also be implications for players wanting to join French or Italian clubs.Europe’s far-right parties have rejoiced at the UK’s vote to leave the European Union, hailing it as a victory for their own anti-immigration and anti-EU stances and vowing to push for similar referendums in countries such as France, the Netherlands and Denmark.

France’s Front National (FN) hailed Brexit as a clear boost for Marine Le Pen’s presidential bid next spring, as well as a move that gave momentum to the party’s anti-Europe and anti-immigration line.
“Victory for Freedom! As I have been asking for years, we must now have the same referendum in France and EU countries,” Le Pen wrote on Twitter.
Florian Philippot (@f_philippot) La liberté des peuples finit toujours par gagner ! Bravo le Royaume-Uni. A nous maintenant ! #Brexit #Frexit
A jubilant Le Pen delivered a Brexit victory speech from her party’s headquarters outside Paris, styling the UK referendum result as just the start of an unstoppable new wave of support for parties and movements like the Front National. “The UK has begun a movement that can’t be stopped,” she said.
Le Pen swiftly changed her social media handles to the Union flag and stated her “warmest and friendliest” congratulations to “very brave” Boris Johnson and the leave campaign. Specially printed Front National Brexit posters showed hands breaking free from chains, with the caption “Now it’s France’s turn”.
Marion Le Pen (@Marion_M_Le_Pen) VICTORY ! #EUref #Brexit
Le Pen, who has been calling for a French EU referendum for three years and is expected to comfortably reach the final round of the presidential election in April, had seized on the UK’s EU referendum to bolster her critical stance on the bloc and on Brexit as a new opportunity for the far right to win over new French voters.
She has said that if if she wins the French presidency, she will within six months hold an in-out referendum on the country’s membership of the union and campaign for a French exit, or “Frexit”. “Europe will be at the heart of the next [French] presidential election” Le Pen said.
Brexit, she said, was also about a wider resurgence of what she called “patriotic” movements across Europe. On Friday many of those movements – rightwing, far-right, and Eurosceptic parties – appeared similarly emboldened and energised by the Brexit vote.
In the Netherlands, the far right and anti-immigration leader Geert Wilders called for a referendum on Dutch membership of the EU. “I think it’s historic,” he told Dutch radio. “I think it could also have huge consequences for the Netherlands and the rest of Europe. Now it’s our turn. I think the Dutch people must now be given the chance to have their say in a referendum.”


Geert Wilders (@geertwilderspvv) Congratulations Britain!

Congratulations @Nigel_Farage pic.twitter.com/VH7c8cStW0
In Germany, Beatrix von Storch, an MEP for the rightwing populist party Alternative für Deutschland, welcomed the result.
“The 23 June is a historic day. It is Great Britain’s independence day. The people were asked – and they decided. The European Union as a political union has failed,” said Storch, who was recently expelled from the Tories’ party group in the European parliament after suggesting German police might be within their rights to shoot refugees trying to cross the border.
The far right Sweden Democrats, meanwhile, who hold the balance of power in Stockholm, tweeted: “Congratulations to Britain’s people on choosing independence! Now we are waiting for a #swexit!”
Florian Philippot (@f_philippot) Ambiance franco-britannique pour célébrer la liberté des nations ! pic.twitter.com/A0rVVhno78
The powerful far-right Danish People’s party congratulated the British people on their “bold” choice, which, it said, was a “stinging slap to the whole system”.
The DPP’s spokesperson Kenneth Kristensen Berth told Danish media: “These European bureaucrats have been unusually adept at avoiding any possible confrontation with the massive popular opposition to the project. The [British] signal cannot be overheard.”
The DPP has said it wants a Danish referendum on less binding conditions of EU membership. But Denmark’s centre-right prime minister, who relies on the support of the DPP to prop up his minority administration, said there would be no such plebiscite.
In Athens, Golden Dawn, Europe’s most violent rightwing party, rejoiced at the referendum result. Predicting it would further empower “nationalist forces” across Europe, the neo-fascist group welcomed what it described as “the brave decision of the British people” and said it hoped a similar referendum could take place in Greece.
“Golden Dawn welcomes the victory of the nationalist and patriotic forces in Great Britain against the European Union, which has been transformed into the doleful instrument of loan sharks,” said the party’s leader Nikolaos Michaloliakos.
Debt-stricken Greece, the eurozone’s weakest link and until now most volatile member state, has been bailed out three times since 2010. “I hope that sometime a referendum can be held in Greece, which has been brought to its knees economically and enslaved, assigning its national sovereignty to the Europe of usurers,” the leader, an ardent admirer of Adolf Hitler, added.
Amid signs of growing anti-European sentiment in the country, there are fears that Golden Dawn, currently Athens’ third biggest political force, will be bolstered on the back of anger over a new round of gruelling tax increases, wage and pension cuts expected to kick in this year.
In other parts of Europe the reaction even among Eurosceptics was more measured. Italy’s anti-establishment Five Star Movement, which won a remarkable 25% of the vote in the 2013 national election and this month gained new momentum when its candidates were elected mayors of Rome and Turin, reacted to the Brexit vote with a lengthy critique of Brussels.
Movimento 5 Stelle (@Mov5Stelle) La UE o cambia o muore https://t.co/Iobh04LDLy pic.twitter.com/sJVMOt14AK
The EU should change or else it would die, said the movement, which has been demanding a referendum on the single currency for years.
“The Leave of the United Kingdom sets forth the failure of political communities facing austerity, and the egotism of the member states, incapable of being a community … We want a Europe which is a ‘community’ and not a union of banks and lobbies,” said the party, writing on the blog of founder Beppe Grillo.
Additional reporting by Philip Oltermann in Berlin, Gordon Darroch in the Hague, David Crouch in Gothenburg, Helena Smith in Athens and Rosie Scammell in RomeLadbrokes has admitted that betting markets got the EU referendum outcome completely wrong and will have to “face up to some tough questions”.
As the polls closed on Thursday night, Ladbrokes was offering 4-1 on an out vote, with its betting suggesting that a remain verdict was a 90% certainty.
But with much more money bet on remain than leave, the bookies are likely to turn a large profit.

In a candid statement, Ladbrokes’ head of political betting, Matthew Shaddick, said: “The truth is that bookies do not offer markets on political events to help people forecast the results. We do it to turn a profit (or at least not lose too much) and in that respect, this vote worked out very well for us.
“Nobody at Ladbrokes’ HQ will be criticising the predictive powers of our odds, they’ll be looking at the money we made.”
More than £40m was gambled in the biggest political betting event in British history.
William Hill said one woman in central London placed her first ever bet by putting £100,000 on the UK voting to stay, while another woman, from Kingston, south-west London, gambled for the first time by staking £10,000 on leave.
Shaddick said one reason why the bookies were so wrong was that most political betting was done by the relatively well-off, who were behind remain, and this affected the odds.
“Whilst I see no evidence that the betting was deliberately ‘manipulated’ by big money, I think there’s something to be considered in the fact that the most affluent sections of society were generally behind remain. Maybe there just aren’t enough dispassionate investors out there to correct that possible bias, even in a multi-million pound market like the referendum.”

He said it may just come down to a case of the outsider winning.
“Is this just one of the inevitable, normal occasions where an outsider wins, or a fatal blow to the idea of betting markets as being a useful forecasting tool? Maybe unsurprisingly, I tend to think the former, but that doesn’t mean we don’t have to reflect on all of their potential flaws and decide how we best interpret them in the future.”It was a struggle, but some of the front pages of the late editions of the national newspapers did seek to reflect the breathtaking nature of the Brexit vote.
Although editors faced the difficulty of keeping up with the momentous news that developed throughout their usual publishing times, some produced extra early morning editions in which they managed to report the central story.
Both the Daily Mail, a paper that called for Britain to leave the EU, and the Daily Mirror, a paper that urged voters to stay, used the same headline: “We’re out.”
The Sun, another leave supporter, chose “Brexsplit”. And an inside spread was headlined “Oop Yours!”, a reference to the massive anti-EU voting in northern cities and Labour’s traditional heartlands.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest The Sun’s 6am edition. Photograph: Twitter
And it even managed to produce a 6am edition, “See EU later!”, but it’s doubtful whether too many copies of it reached readers.
Although the Daily Express stuck to the pedestrian line, “Historic day for Britain”, in every edition, the other title that campaigned for leaving, the Daily Telegraph, changed up in the early hours to record the news.
Its main headline, “Britain backs Brexit”, ran over a picture of people in Sunderland celebrating the big margin of victory in their city.
And the paper was also swift to turn the heat on the leader of the opposition with an inside story, “Corbyn blow as Labour heartlands vote Leave.”
The Times, a remain backer, also noted the significance of that vote in the north east: “Sunderland starts shockwave that’s felt around world”. On its front, it went with a simple statement of fact: “Britain’s Brexit revolt”
The Guardian’s final edition cast the story forward by seeing it in terms of the implications for the political fortunes of the prime minister: “Cameron faces fight for survival as Britain sets course for Brexit”.
But this was a story where broadcast and digital media had the advantage of reporting in real time. For the newsprint reaction, we must wait until tomorrow.From the ‘red-tape’ slashing desires of the Brexiters to the judgment of green professionals, all indications are for weaker environmental protections
Despite being an issue that knows no borders, affects all and is of vital interest to future generations, the environment was low on the agenda ahead of the UK’s historic vote to leave the European Union.
The short answer to what happens next with pollution, wildlife, farming, green energy, climate change and more is we don’t know – we are in uncharted territory. But all the indications – from the “red-tape” slashing desires of the Brexiters to the judgment of environmental professionals – are that the protections for our environment will get weaker.
There is one immediate impact though, right here, right now: the crashing financial markets will damage the huge investments needed to create a cleaner and safer environment and will dent the nation’s fast-growing green economy, one economic sector where the UK could lead.
From the air we breathe to the food we eat to the climate we live in, how we protect and enhance the environment underpins the healthy and happy lives we all aspire to, now and for generations to come.
The 75% of 18-24-year-old Britons who voted to remain in the EU must be feeling betrayed by older generations today. Why? Because the UK’s membership of the EU has been a virtually unalloyed good for the environment.
The Brexit vote leaves it highly uncertain which protections will remain in place and the prospect of improving them seems remote. Ukip’s Nigel Farage, the politician who did more than anyone to force the EU referendum, doesn’t even think climate change is a problem and wants to scrap pollution limits on power stations.
With 400,000 early deaths a year from air pollution – 40,000 in the UK – the EU saw things differently and set new legal limits in 2010. Many UK cities and towns remain above those limits today and campaigners have used EU rules to successfully sue the UK government. But UK ministers are even now fighting new EU rules to reduce early deaths. Pollution does not stop in its tracks at national borders, and 88% of environment professionals in the UK think an EU-wide policy is needed.
Earlier legal action from the EU forced the UK to clean up its sewage-strewn beaches, while many of the protections for nature and wildlife across the nation stem from EU rules. Here again, the people whose job it is to safeguard these wonderful places and reverse the damage of the past think leaving the EU is a mistake: 66% say there will be a lower level of legal protection for wildlife and habitats against 30% who think it will improve.
The EU has also driven a revolution in recycling and waste. What will happen to that, according to the people who made it happen on the ground? Two-thirds of the professionals think it will go into reverse, with 30% saying it will stay the same and just 4% thinking it will improve.
One major EU policy – its vast subsidy regime for farmers – has not been good for wildlife by encouraging damaging intensive agriculture: there are 421m fewer birds in Europe than 30 years ago. But the Common Agricultural Policy was improving its approach to the environment and supports the farmers who put food on our tables every day. They are now in an agonising limbo. Fisherman may hope to get larger quotas now the UK is leaving the EU but for how long? There will not, without strong protections, be plenty more fish in the sea for long.
The National Farmers Union (NFU) may get one wish from Brexit: the scrapping of a ban on pesticides that harm bees and other crucial pollinators. The NFU and UK ministers fought the ban, but the collective will of the EU saw it put in place.
The collective will of the EU has also been vital in climate change, both on the international stage and at home in the UK. The UK’s targets for renewable energy were agreed in Brussels but leaving the EU puts them into limbo too.
However, despite the current government hacking back support for clean energy, the UK does have strong domestic legislation which sets deep cuts in carbon emissions into law. But Boris Johnson, now a leading contender to be the UK’s next prime minister, is a climate change sceptic: will he act on his conviction that all this global warming malarkey is piffle?
James Thornton, the chief executive of Client Earth, the lawyers who forced the government to improve its air pollution plans, said Brexit “leaves me shocked, disappointed and extremely concerned about the future of environmental protections in the UK.” Craig Bennett, head of Friends of the Earth, said the leave vote was a “red alert” for the environment.
Farage’s reaction to Brexit was unsurprisingly different: “I couldn’t be more delighted.”Governor says Bank of England will take any measures needed to secure economic and financial stability
Bank of England governor Mark Carney has sought to calm financial market fears about the impact of the UK’s Brexit vote by insisting that Threadneedle Street will take any measures needed to secure economic and financial stability.
In a statement choreographed to follow David Cameron’s announcement that he intended to step down as prime minister, Carney said contingency plans drawn up by the Bank and the Treasury would now swing into action.
The Bank governor said UK banks were in better shape than they were before the 2008 financial crisis. But he added that he was prepared to inject an additional £250bn to ensure that financial institutions did not run short of cash during what he admitted would be a period of uncertainty.
The Bank has also set up arrangements with other central banks around the world to provide foreign currency to the UK markets should that be required.
Stressing that some market and economic volatility was to be expected in the aftermath of the Brexit vote, Carney added: “But we are well prepared for this. The Treasury and the Bank of England have engaged in extensive contingency planning and the chancellor and I have been in close contact, including through the night and this morning.”
Some City analysts expect the Bank to boost the economy by cutting interest rates or re-starting the money creation programme known as quantitative easing, but Carney made it clear that Threadneedle Street would not be rushed into decisions by the shock nature of the referendum result.
Bank of England promises £250bn to calm markets after Brexit vote - live updates Read more
“In the coming weeks, the Bank will assess economic conditions and will consider any additional policy responses”, he said in a statement.

The Bank said in its quarterly inflation report last month that Brexit poised the most significant threat to the UK’s financial stability.
Carney said that in order to mitigate those risks the Bank had ensured the financial system was “well-capitalised, liquid and strong”, adding that it would ensure that market remained orderly.
The economy would adjust to new trading arrangements that would be put in place over time, the governor said, noting that the Bank’s job was to ensure its responsibilities of keeping inflation under control and the financial system stable.
“These are unchanged. We have taken all the necessary steps to prepare for today’s events. In the future we will not hesitate to take any additional measures required to meet our responsibilities as the United Kingdom moves forward.”