In Barcelona, Rajoy Calls for Record Turnout to Defeat Secessionism Image Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of Spain at a rally on Sunday in Barcelona. Credit David Ramos/Getty Images
MADRID — In his first visit to Catalonia since taking control of the restive region in Spain, Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy on Sunday urged Catalans to vote in next month’s elections to defeat the independence movement and return the region to “normality.”
Mr. Rajoy, addressing Catalan supporters of his conservative Popular Party, rejected criticism of the jailing of separatist politicians, a day after hundreds of thousands of pro-independence demonstrators marched in Barcelona, the Catalan capital, to demand their release.
“In Spain, you can defend any idea,” Mr. Rajoy said, but only as long as it is done within the rule of law.
Mr. Rajoy’s government took charge of Catalonia on Oct. 27, using emergency powers under Article 155 of the Spanish Constitution, shortly after separatist lawmakers voted for independence from Spain. He fired the Catalan government, dissolved the Catalan Parliament and set new regional elections for Dec. 21.
After Mr. Rajoy imposed direct rule on Catalonia, the region’s former leader, Carles Puigdemont, arrived in Brussels. He is fighting an arrest warrant issued by Spain’s judiciary to force him and four other Catalan politicians to return to Madrid to stand trial on charges including rebellion. Other members of the former Catalan government were recently jailed without bail.
But ahead of the December elections, the independence movement has shown signs of strain. Mr. Puigdemont failed this past week to strike an agreement between the two main Catalan parties to renew the joint, pro-independence ticket that brought them into office in late 2015.
On Sunday, the representatives of the far-left party of Ada Colau, the mayor of Barcelona, voted to break up their governing coalition in Barcelona’s City Hall with the Socialists, because the Socialists had backed Mr. Rajoy’s decision to take over Catalonia’s administration.
In response, Miquel Iceta, the Socialist leader in Catalonia, accused Ms. Colau’s party of choosing Catalan independence over the interests of Barcelona.
Image Supporters of independence for Catalonia demonstrated in Brussels on Sunday. Credit Olivier Matthys/Associated Press
On Twitter, Ms. Colau called the breakup of her governing coalition on Sunday “a difficult decision.” She recently had criticized the separatist lawmakers for unilaterally declaring independence. Still, the mayor joined the protest on Saturday to demand the release of eight jailed former members of the Catalan government, as well as that of two other separatist leaders.
About 750,000 people marched in Barcelona, according to the local police. From Brussels, Mr. Puidgemont thanked the demonstrators, on Twitter, for being “our strength.”
On Sunday, however, Mr. Rajoy called on “the silent or silenced majority” that opposes secessionism to “convert its voice into votes” on Dec. 21. In the most recent regional elections, in September 2015, separatist parties won a majority of the seats in the Catalan Parliament, but with only 48 percent of the votes.
The leading candidate of the Popular Party in Catalonia, Xavier García Albiol, told supporters that “independence is toxic and destroys Catalonia.”
Image Supporters of the Popular Party in Catalonia during a rally on Sunday in Barcelona. Credit David Ramos/Getty Images
Mr. García Albiol condemned suggestions that Catalan separatist leaders were being held in Madrid jails as political prisoners.
“Spain today is one of the most consolidated democracies of Europe and the world,” he said.
Both Mr. Rajoy and Mr. García Albiol highlighted the negative financial consequences of the secessionist conflict and assured Catalan voters that they would help return the region to economic health by beating the separatist parties next month.
Mr. Rajoy urged Spanish consumers not to boycott Catalan goods and said that he was determined to stop separatists from pursuing “a journey to nowhere, that will again bring crisis, unemployment and the fracture of Catalan society.”
Mr. García Albiol said that more than 2,400 companies had moved their legal headquarters from Catalonia since the start of October.
“Never have companies left any part of the world so quickly,” he said.
Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 4 of the New York edition with the headline: Spanish Prime Minister Urges ‘Silent’ Majority to Halt Catalan Independence



Sign up for The Interpreter Subscribe for original insights, commentary and discussions on the major news stories of the week, from columnists Max Fisher and Amanda Taub. SEE SAMPLE Please verify you’re not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. * Required field You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times products and services. Thank you for subscribing. View all New York Times newsletters. An error has occurred. Please try again later. You are already subscribed to this email. View all New York Times newsletters. Sign Up